# Introduction
Understanding the sequence determinants that give rise to diversity among individuals and species is the central challenge of genetics. Despite ever-greater numbers of sequenced genomes, most genome-wide association studies (GWAS) cannot distinguish true causal variants from tightly linked passenger mutations spanning many neighboring genes. This inherent limitation stems from the structure of linkage disequilibrium in human populations, which causes extensive blocks of the genome to be inherited together.

We report that this fundamental challenge can be overcome in model organisms by utilizing highly recombined inbred crosses. By pushing the advantages of inbred crossing to its practical limit in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we have dramatically improved the statistical resolution of genetic linkage analysis to single nucleotides. This 'super-resolution' mapping approach allowed us to accurately map 370 precise causal variants across 26 distinct quantitative traits. Surprisingly, we found that missense, synonymous, and cis-regulatory mutations collectively gave rise to phenotypic diversity, challenging common assumptions about which types of mutations are functionally important and providing mechanistic insight into the basis of evolutionary divergence. Our comprehensive data also systematically unmasked complex genetic architectures, revealing that multiple closely linked driver mutations frequently act in concert on the same quantitative trait within a single locus. Single-nucleotide mapping thus complements traditional deletion and overexpression screening paradigms and opens new frontiers in understanding the genetic basis of quantitative traits.