# Abstract

A strong candidate for the 17q-linked BRCA1 gene, which influences susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer, has been identified by positional cloning methods. Probable predisposing mutations have been detected in five of eight kindreds presumed to segregate BRCA1 susceptibility alleles. The mutations include an 11-base pair deletion, a 1-base pair insertion, a stop codon, a missense substitution, and an inferred regulatory mutation. The BRCA1 gene is expressed in numerous tissues, including breast and ovary, and encodes a predicted protein of 1863 amino acids. This protein contains a zinc finger domain in its amino-terminal region, but is otherwise unrelated to previously described proteins. Identification of BRCA1 should facilitate early diagnosis of breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility in some individuals as well as a better understanding of breast cancer biology.

# Introduction

Breast cancer is one of the most common and important diseases affecting women. Current estimates indicate that one in eight American women who reach age 95 will develop breast cancer. Treatment of advanced breast cancer is often futile and disfiguring, making early detection a high priority in medical management of the disease. Ovarian cancer, although less frequent than breast cancer, is often rapidly fatal and is the fourth most common cause of cancer mortality in American women.

Genetic factors contribute to an ill-defined proportion of breast cancer incidence, estimated to be about 5% of all cases but approximately 25% of cases diagnosed before age 30. Breast cancer has been subdivided into two types, early-onset and late-onset, a division that is based on an inflection in the age-specific incidence curve around age 50. Mutation of one gene, BRCA1, is thought to account for approximately 45% of families with significantly high breast cancer incidence and at least 80% of families with increased incidence of both early-onset breast cancer and ovarian cancer. Intense efforts to isolate the BRCA1 gene have proceeded since it was first mapped to chromosome arm 17q in 1990. A second locus, BRCA2, recently mapped to chromosome arm 13q, appears to account for a proportion of early-onset breast cancer roughly equal to that resulting from BRCA1. Unlike BRCA1, however, BRCA2 may not influence ovarian cancer risk. The remaining susceptibility to early-onset breast cancer is likely attributable to unmapped genes for familial cancer and rare germline mutations in genes such as TP53, which encodes the tumor suppressor protein p53. It has also been suggested that heterozygote carriers of defective forms of the gene predisposing to ataxia telangiectasia are at higher risk for breast cancer. Late-onset breast cancer is often familial in origin, although the risks in relatives are not as high as those for early-onset breast cancer. The percentage of such cases that are due to genetic susceptibility is unknown.

Like many other genes involved in familial cancer, BRCA1 appears to encode a tumor suppressor, a protein that acts as a negative regulator of tumor growth. Cancer-predisposing alleles typically carry mutations that cause loss or reduction of gene function. Predisposition to cancer is inherited as a dominant genetic trait, whereas the predisposing allele generally behaves as a recessive allele in somatic cells. Thus, a single inherited copy of the mutant allele causes predisposition, and loss or inactivation of the wild-type allele occurs in the tumor cells.

# Main

Genetic analysis of recombinant chromosomes in members of large kindreds allowed localization of BRCA1 initially to a region of 1 to 2 megabases on chromosome 17q and, subsequently, to a region of about 600 kilobase pairs (kb) between markers D17S1321 and D17S1325. A physical map comprised of overlapping yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs), P1, bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs), and cosmid clones was generated for this region.

Several strategies were used to develop a detailed map of transcripts for the 600-kb region of 17q21 between D17S1321 and D17S1325. Sixty-five candidate expressed sequences within this region were identified. Expressed sequences were characterized by DNA sequence, database comparison, transcript size, expression pattern, genomic structure and, most importantly, DNA sequence analysis in individuals from kindreds that segregate 17q-linked breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility. Three expressed sequences eventually were merged into a single transcription unit whose characteristics strongly suggest that it is BRCA1. This transcription unit is located in the center of the 600-kb region spanning D17S855 and will be referred to herein as BRCA1.

A combination of sequences obtained from complementary DNA (cDNA) clones, hybrid-selected sequences, and amplified polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products allowed the construction of a composite, full-length BRCA1 cDNA. The cDNA clone extending farthest in the 3' direction contains a polyadenylate tract preceded by a polyadenylation signal. Conceptual translation of the cDNA revealed a single, long open reading frame with a presumptive initiation codon flanked by sequences resembling the Kozak consensus sequence. This reading frame encodes a protein of 1863 amino acids. Searches identified a sequence near the NH2-terminus that has considerable similarity to zinc finger domains. This sequence contains cysteine and histidine residues present in the consensus Cys3-His-Cys4 (C3HC4) zinc finger motif and shares many other residues with zinc finger proteins in the databases. The BRCA1 gene is composed of 22 coding exons distributed over roughly 100 kb of genomic DNA.

Hybridization of RNA blots to labeled fragments of BRCA1 cDNA revealed a single transcript of 7.8 kb. This transcript is most abundant in testis and thymus, but is also present in breast and ovary. The cDNA clones derived from the 5' one-third of BRCA1 transcripts display a complex pattern of alternative splicing. Four alternative splices were observed downstream of the start codon as independent cDNA clones; three of these patterns were detected in breast cDNA and two in ovary cDNA. In addition, PCR analysis of cDNA samples prepared from breast, ovary, testis, and lymphocyte messenger RNA (mRNA) indicates that there is considerable heterogeneity in splice junction usage near the 5' end of BRCA1 transcripts, upstream of the presumptive initiation codon. How this alternative splicing is coordinated with alternative splicing farther downstream, and whether all the splice variants produce proteins with an identical NH2-terminus, are questions that remain to be explored.

We also probed genomic DNA samples from several different species with BRCA1 sequences devoid of the zinc finger region. Low-stringency blots revealed strongly hybridizing fragments in tissues from humans, mice, rats, rabbits, sheep, and pigs, but not chickens. These results suggest that BRCA1 is conserved in mammals.

Identification of a candidate gene as BRCA1 requires a demonstration of potentially disruptive mutations in that gene in carrier individuals from kindreds that segregate 17q-linked susceptibility to breast and ovarian cancer. Such individuals must contain BRCA1 alleles that differ from the wild-type sequence. The set of DNA samples used in this analysis consisted of DNA from individuals representing eight different BRCA1 kindreds. The lod scores (likelihood ratios for linkage) in these kindreds range from 9.49 to -0.44 for a set of markers in 17q21. Four of the families have convincing lod scores for linkage, and four have low positive or negative lod scores. The latter kindreds were included because they demonstrate haplotype sharing at chromosome 17q21 for at least three affected members. Furthermore, all kindreds in the set display early-onset breast cancer, and four of the kindreds include at least one case of ovarian cancer, both hallmarks of BRCA1 kindreds. Kindred 2082 has nearly equal incidence of breast and ovarian cancer, an unusual occurrence given the relative rarity of ovarian cancer in the population. All but two of the kindreds were ascertained in Utah. Kindred 2035 is from the midwestern United States. Kindred 2099 is an African American kindred from the southern United States; all other kindreds are Caucasian.

In the initial screen for predisposing mutations in BRCA1, DNA from one individual carrying the predisposing haplotype from each kindred was tested. The 21 coding exons and associated splice junctions were amplified from either genomic DNA samples or cDNA prepared from lymphocyte mRNA. When the amplified DNA sequences were compared to the wild-type sequence, four of the eight kindred samples were found to contain sequence variants. All four sequence variants are heterozygous, and each appears in only one of the kindreds. Kindred 1901 contains an 11-base pair (bp) deletion in exon 2 (Cys24 frameshift to 36 Stop). Kindred 2082 contains a nonsense mutation in coding exon 11 (Gln1313 to Stop). Kindred 1910 contains a single nucleotide insertion in coding exon 20 (Gln1756 frameshift to 1829 Stop), and kindred 2099 contains a missense mutation in coding exon 21 (Met1775Arg). The frameshift and nonsense mutations are likely to disrupt the function of the BRCA1 proteins. The protein encoded by the insertion allele in kindred 1910 would contain an altered sequence beginning 107 amino acids residues from the wild-type COOH-terminus. The effect of the 11-bp deletion in kindred 1901 would be even more dramatic because it occurs at the twenty-fourth codon. This deletion removes the last 11 bp of exon 2 and begins at the first cysteine of the zinc finger motif, thereby removing the zinc finger domain. The mutant allele in kindred 2082 would encode a protein missing 548 residues from the COOH-terminus.

The missense mutation observed in kindred 2099 is potentially disruptive as it substitutes a large, charged amino acid (Arg) for a small, hydrophobic amino acid (Met). Five common polymorphisms were also identified in the BRCA1 coding sequence.

The individual studied in kindred 2035 is likely to carry a regulatory mutation in BRCA1. In her cDNA, two polymorphic sites appeared homozygous, whereas her genomic DNA revealed heterozygosity at these positions. One possible explanation for this observation is that mRNA from her mutant BRCA1 allele is absent because of a mutation that affects RNA production or stability. We explored this possibility further by examining three additional polymorphic sites in the BRCA1 coding region, which are separated by as much as 3.5 kb in the BRCA1 transcript. In all cases where her genomic DNA appeared heterozygous for a polymorphism, her cDNA appeared homozygous. In individuals from other kindreds and in nonhaplotype carriers in kindred 2035, these polymorphic sites appeared heterozygous in cDNA, implying that amplification from cDNA was not biased in favor of one allele. This analysis indicates that a BRCA1 mutation in kindred 2035 either prevents transcription or causes instability or aberrant splicing of the BRCA1 transcript.

In addition to potential disruption of protein function, a sequence variant must meet two other criteria to qualify as a candidate predisposing mutation: It must be present in members of the kindred who carry the predisposing haplotype and absent from other members of the kindred, and it must be rare in the general population. To test for cosegregation of mutations with the corresponding BRCA1 susceptibility allele, we screened several individuals from kindreds 1901, 1910, 2082, and 2099, including both carriers and noncarriers of the predisposing haplotype. In each kindred, the corresponding mutant allele was detected only in individuals carrying the BRCA1-associated haplotype. In the case of the potential regulatory mutation in kindred 2035, cDNA and genomic DNA from carriers in the kindred were compared for heterozygosity at polymorphic sites. In every instance, the extinguished allele in the cDNA sample was shown to lie on the chromosome that carries the BRCA1 predisposing allele. To exclude the possibility that the mutations were simply common polymorphisms in the population, we used allele-specific oligonucleotides (ASOs) for each mutation to screen a set of control DNA samples. None of the four potential predisposing mutations tested was found in the appropriate control population, indicating that they are rare in the general population. Thus, both important requirements for BRCA1 susceptibility alleles are fulfilled by the candidate predisposing mutations: cosegregation of the mutant allele with disease and absence of the mutant allele in controls, indicating a low frequency in the general population.

The effect of the mutations on the BRCA1 protein correlates with differences in the observed phenotypic expression in the BRCA1 kindreds. Most BRCA1 kindreds have a moderately increased ovarian cancer risk, and a smaller subset have a high risk of ovarian cancer comparable to that for breast cancer. Four of the five kindreds in which BRCA1 mutations were detected fall into the former category, and the fifth (kindred 2082) falls into the group with high ovarian cancer risk. The BRCA1 nonsense mutation found in kindred 2082 has an interesting phenotype. Kindred 2082 has a high incidence of ovarian cancer, and the mean age of breast cancer diagnosis is older than that in the other kindreds. This difference in age of onset could be due to an ascertainment bias in the smaller, more highly penetrant families, or it could reflect tissue-specific differences in the behavior of BRCA1 mutations. The other four kindreds that segregate known BRCA1 mutations have, on average, 1 ovarian cancer for every 10 cases of breast cancer, but have a high proportion of breast cancer cases diagnosed at an early age (late 20s or early 30s). Kindred 1910, which has a 1-bp insertion mutation, is noteworthy because three of the four affected individuals had bilateral breast cancer, and in each case the second tumor was diagnosed within a year of the first occurrence. Kindred 2035, which segregates the potential regulatory BRCA1 mutation, might also be expected to have a dramatic phenotype. Eighty percent of breast cancer cases in this kindred occur under age 50. This figure is as high as any in the set, suggesting that this BRCA1 mutant allele has a high penetrance. Kindred 1901 displays a phenotypic pattern similar to that of kindred 2035. It is likely that the 11-bp deletion beginning at codon 24 carried in kindred 1901 results in a loss of gene function similar to the effect of the regulatory mutation in kindred 2035. Although the mutations described in this article are clearly deleterious, causing breast cancer in women at very young ages, each of the four kindreds with mutations includes at least one woman who carried the mutation but lived until age 80 without developing a malignancy. It will be of utmost importance in future studies to identify other genetic factors or environmental factors that may ameliorate the effects of BRCA1 mutations. In addition, in three of the eight putative BRCA1-linked kindreds, potential predisposing mutations were not found. All of these kindreds have lod scores for BRCA1-linked markers of less than 0.55 and thus may not truly segregate BRCA1-predisposing alleles. Alternatively, the mutations in these three kindreds may lie in noncoding regions of BRCA1 and therefore have escaped detection.

# Discussion

Most mutant tumor suppressor genes identified to date encode proteins that are absent, nonfunctional, or reduced in function. The majority of TP53 mutations are missense; some of these have been shown to produce abnormal p53 molecules that interfere with the function of the wild-type product. A similar dominant-negative mechanism of action has been proposed for some adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) alleles that produce truncated molecules and for point mutations in the Wilms tumor gene (WT1), which alter DNA binding of the WT1 protein. The nature of three mutations observed in the BRCA1 coding sequence is consistent with production of either dominant-negative proteins or nonfunctional proteins. All three mutations are located in the COOH-terminal half of the protein. The regulatory mutation inferred in kindred 2035 cannot be dominant-negative; rather, this mutation likely causes reduction or complete loss of BRCA1 expression from the affected allele. Similarly, the 11-bp deletion in kindred 1901 likely produces a nonfunctional product.

The BRCA1 protein contains a C3HC4 zinc finger domain similar to domains found in numerous nucleic acid binding proteins. The first 180 amino acids of BRCA1 contain five more basic residues than acidic residues. In contrast, the remainder of the molecule is very acidic, with a net excess of 70 acidic residues. The excess negative charge is particularly concentrated near the COOH-terminus. Thus, one possibility is that BRCA1 encodes a transcription factor with an NH2-terminal DNA binding domain and a COOH-terminal "acidic blob" domain with transactivational activity. Interestingly, the product of another familial tumor suppressor gene, WT1, also contains zinc finger domains, and these are altered by many cancer-predisposing mutations in the gene. The WT1 gene encodes a transcription factor, and alternative splicing of exons that encode parts of the zinc finger domains alters the DNA binding properties of WT1. Some alternatively spliced forms of WT1 mRNA generate WT1 proteins that act as transcriptional repressors. Differential splicing of BRCA1 may alter the zinc finger motif, raising the possibility that a regulatory mechanism similar to that occurring in WT1 may apply to BRCA1.

The identification of a gene that (i) falls within the interval known from genetic studies to include BRCA1 and (ii) contains frameshift, nonsense, and regulatory mutations that cosegregate with predisposing BRCA1 alleles strongly indicates that this gene is BRCA1. The observation of potential predisposing mutations in individuals whose early-onset breast or ovarian cancer was not ascertained by family history supports the view that many early-onset cases are due to mutations at the BRCA1 locus. The role of BRCA1 in cancer progression may now be addressed with molecular precision. The large size and fragmented nature of the coding sequence will make exhaustive searches for new mutations challenging. Nevertheless, the percentage of total breast and ovarian cancer caused by mutant BRCA1 alleles will soon be estimated, and individual mutation frequencies and penetrances may be established. This in turn may permit accurate genetic screening for predisposition to a common, deadly disease. Although such research represents an advance in medical and biological knowledge, it also raises numerous ethical and practical issues, both scientific and social, that must be addressed by the medical community.