# Abstract
A widespread system used by bacteria for protection against potentially dangerous foreign DNA molecules consists of the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) coupled with cas (CRISPR-associated) genes. Similar to RNA interference in eukaryotes, these CRISPR/Cas systems use small RNAs for sequence-specific detection and neutralization of invading genomes. Here we describe the first examples of genes that mediate the inhibition of a CRISPR/Cas system. Five distinct 'anti-CRISPR' genes were found in the genomes of bacteriophages infecting Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Mutation of the anti-CRISPR gene of a phage rendered it unable to infect bacteria with a functional CRISPR/Cas system, and the addition of the same gene to the genome of a CRISPR/Cas-targeted phage allowed it to evade the CRISPR/Cas system. Phage-encoded anti-CRISPR genes may represent a widespread mechanism for phages to overcome the highly prevalent CRISPR/Cas systems. The existence of anti-CRISPR genes presents new avenues for the elucidation of CRISPR/Cas functional mechanisms and provides new insight into the co-evolution of phages and bacteria.

# Introduction
Predation by phages presents an important challenge to bacterial survival, and bacteria have evolved numerous mechanisms to resist phage infection. One such system is the CRISPR/Cas immune system, which is found in 48% of Eubacteria and 95% of Archaea. CRISPR loci contain multiple repeated sequences of approximately 30 base pairs, separated by variable 'spacer' sequences of similar length, which are often identical to segments of phage genomes or other mobile genetic elements. The large single transcript from a CRISPR locus is processed in the repeat regions into small CRISPR RNAs (crRNAs) that are complexed with Cas proteins. Using the crRNAs as guides, crRNA/Cas complexes cleave foreign DNA molecules at sites bearing complementarity to the crRNAs, thus engendering resistance to phages and other invading DNA molecules. Cas proteins also mediate an adaptive function by incorporating short sequences (that is, a new spacer) from newly encountered foreign genomes into CRISPR loci so that these genomes will be destroyed in subsequent encounters. The relatively recent elucidation of CRISPR/Cas functions and their obvious similarities to RNA interference (RNAi) systems of eukaryotes have led to vigorous investigation of these systems.

# Main
Because phage genes have been discovered that can neutralize most of the prevalent bacterial anti-phage defences, the failure to identify genes that counteract the widely occurring CRISPR/Cas systems has been surprising. To search for such 'anti-CRISPR' activity, we investigated the type I-F CRISPR/Cas system of the opportunistic pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa using a collection of 44 lysogens of P. aeruginosa PA14, which each contained a different phage genome. In lysogens, phage genomes are integrated into the bacterial genome and are referred to as prophages. Although prophage genes are generally repressed, all prophages have some genes that are actively transcribed. To test whether prophages might express anti-CRISPR activity, we measured the plaquing efficiency of three 'CRISPR-sensitive' phages (JBD18, JBD25 and JBD67) on our collection of lysogens. The CRISPR-sensitive phages fail to replicate on PA14 owing to the action of the CRISPR/Cas system, but are able to replicate on PA14 ΔCR/cas, which contains no CRISPR loci or cas genes. We identified three lysogenic strains, PA14(JBD24), PA14(MP29) and PA14(JBD30), on which the CRISPR-sensitive phages could form plaques very robustly compared with unlysogenized PA14. Notably, the plaquing efficiency of the CRISPR-sensitive phages on PA14(JBD30) was equivalent to that on the ΔCR/cas strain, indicating that the JBD30 prophage caused complete inactivation of the CRISPR/Cas system. The lower plaquing efficiency of the CRISPR-sensitive phages on the other lysogens relative to their plaquing on the ΔCR/cas strain may be due to their production of less potent anti-CRISPR activity. However, these prophages also attenuate plaquing through mechanisms independent of the CRISPR/Cas system, as demonstrated by the partial inhibition of plaquing of the control phage, DMS3, which is not affected by the CRISPR/Cas system.

To assess directly the anti-CRISPR activity of the PA14 lysogens, we used a plasmid-based transformation efficiency assay. The sequences within phages that are targeted by the CRISPR/Cas system are called protospacers. To be targeted, a protospacer sequence must be complementary to a specific spacer sequence in the CRISPR locus and possess a correct protospacer adjacent motif. Protospacer sequences are named according to the spacer sequence that they match in the PA14 genome. We constructed plasmids containing targeted protospacer sequences from phages JBD18 (CRISPR2 locus, spacer 1 or CR2_sp1) and JBD25 (CR1_sp1). The transformation efficiencies of the plasmids bearing protospacers into unlysogenized PA14 were reduced by at least 90% compared with an empty vector control, whereas no difference in transformation efficiency was seen for the three strains containing prophages expressing anti-CRISPR activity, or for the ΔCR/cas strain. These data confirm that the prophages isolated in our screen inhibit the PA14 CRISPR/Cas system.

Genome comparisons showed that the phages producing anti-CRISPR activity were closely related to each other, and showed high sequence similarity and synteny with the previously characterized P. aeruginosa Mu-like phages D3112, DMS3 and MP22. An unusual feature of each of these genomes compared with more distantly related Mu-like phages infecting P. aeruginosa and other hosts is the presence of diverse atypical genes at a single position in the region encoding phage head proteins. We suspected that some of these genes might encode anti-CRISPR activities; thus, 17 of them were cloned and expressed from a high copy number plasmid in PA14 under the control of an arabinose-inducible promoter. Remarkably, expression of eight of these genes led to marked increases in the plaquing efficiency of the CRISPR-sensitive phages. Each anti-CRISPR gene allowed these three different phages to evade the CRISPR/Cas system even though they bore distinct protospacer targets, indicating that the anti-CRISPR genes do not function through protection of specific DNA sequences on the phages. We also found that the anti-CRISPR genes can inhibit the type I-F systems found in other P. aeruginosa strains, demonstrating that this phenomenon is not particular to strain PA14. Finally, we found that the anti-CRISPR genes did not inhibit a type I-E CRISPR/Cas system functioning in Escherichia coli. Because type I-E is the most closely related CRISPR/Cas system to type I-F, we do not expect that these genes would inhibit the function of any of the other more distantly related CRISPR/Cas systems.

For the type I-F CRISPR/Cas system to function, transcription of pre-crRNA from the CRISPR locus must occur, followed by processing into small crRNAs and incorporation of these RNAs into a complex with Cas proteins. The stable maintenance of processed crRNA within the cell requires Cas proteins. Thus, the lack of any P. aeruginosa Cas protein except Cas1, which is involved in spacer acquisition, causes a marked reduction in crRNA amounts. Expression of five different anti-CRISPR genes in PA14 caused no change in the amount of processed crRNA molecules as detected by northern blotting. The normal amount of crRNA observed implies that expression of anti-CRISPR genes does not cause a reduction in the expression amounts of the CRISPR loci or cas genes. Supporting this finding, we also showed that transcription levels of the cas genes cas3 and csy3 were unaffected by the anti-CRISPR genes as assessed by reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). Furthermore, β-galactosidase activity produced from a chromosomally located csy3::lacZ fusion gene was not perturbed by expression of any of the anti-CRISPR genes. We conclude from these experiments that the anti-CRISPR genes exert their effects at a step occurring after formation of the crRNA–Cas complex, and that there is no effect on biogenesis of either the crRNA or Cas proteins.

Despite the common genomic positions of the anti-CRISPR genes in very similar P. aeruginosa phages, these eight genes are predicted to encode five different proteins with completely distinct sequences. Sequence similarity searches with each of these proteins yielded fewer than 15 different significant hits in total, of which all but four were proteins encoded in genomes of closely related phages or prophages. One of the non-phage-associated anti-CRISPR protein homologues, which is 43% identical to the product of gene 33 of phage JBD88a (JBD88a gp33), is encoded in an active pathogenicity island of a highly virulent P. aeruginosa clinical isolate that is probably transferred by conjugation between P. aeruginosa strains. This island contains four protospacers with correct protospacer adjacent motifs and 100% identity to CRISPR spacers in various P. aeruginosa strains. The three other non-phage-associated anti-CRISPR homologues are also found in regions of Pseudomonas genomes that may be mobile elements as indicated by presence of genes in these regions encoding homologues of proteins involved in DNA transfer and/or type IV secretion. Thus, these putative bacterial anti-CRISPR genes may increase the fitness for inter-strain transfer of these mobile elements by inactivating the CRISPR/Cas system of a recipient strain.

Because the crRNA/Cas complex is guided by RNA, anti-CRISPR activity might be mediated by a non-coding RNA molecule or a protein encoded by an anti-CRISPR gene. We addressed this issue by performing experiments on JBD30 gene 35. A nonsense mutation at the third codon and two different frameshift mutations were introduced to the plasmid encoding gene 35. Each of these mutations abrogated anti-CRISPR activity, implying that translation of this region was required for function. Because these experiments did not rule out a combined role for anti-CRISPR non-coding RNA and protein, two variant genes were synthesized that encoded the same amino-acid sequence as gene 35, yet had DNA sequences that differed by approximately 35% through variation of codon wobble positions. Each of these synthetic versions of gene 35 imparted full anti-CRISPR activity. These data demonstrate that anti-CRISPR protein is required for anti-CRISPR activity and that a direct mechanistic role for a gene 35-encoded RNA is unlikely.

The genomes of six of the seven 'anti-CRISPR phages' (that is, those phages bearing active anti-CRISPR genes) contain at least one functional protospacer; thus, their replication should be inhibited by the PA14 CRISPR/Cas system. However, each was able to form plaques on PA14 with 100% efficiency compared with the ΔCR/cas strain. Using the transformation efficiency assay, we confirmed that the two protospacers found most commonly in the anti-CRISPR phages were indeed targeted by the PA14 CRISPR/Cas system. These results implied that the anti-CRISPR phages were able to replicate on PA14 because they possess anti-CRISPR genes. To address this hypothesis, a frameshift mutation was introduced into the phage JBD30 anti-CRISPR gene (gene 35). This mutant phage was unable to replicate on wild-type PA14 but still replicated robustly on the ΔCR/cas strain, demonstrating the requirement of the anti-CRISPR gene for replication in cells bearing an intact CRISPR/Cas system. To determine whether the introduction of an anti-CRISPR gene into a CRISPR-sensitive phage would allow that phage to evade CRISPR/Cas immunity, we used a CRISPR-sensitive mutant of phage DMS3, called DMS3m. This phage possesses a functional protospacer and is very similar in sequence to the anti-CRISPR phages, yet it contains no functional anti-CRISPR gene. Taking advantage of the high DNA sequence identity between phages DMS3m and JBD30, in vivo homologous recombination was used to create a version of DMS3m bearing JBD30 gene 35. The introduction of this gene into DMS3m resulted in a 10⁶-fold increase in plaquing efficiency on PA14, clearly demonstrating that an anti-CRISPR gene present on an infecting phage allows that phage to overcome the CRISPR/Cas system. By testing lysogens of the DMS3m and JBD30 mutant prophages we found that a wild-type version of anti-CRISPR gene 35 was also required to inhibit the CRISPR/Cas system from within a prophage.

# Discussion
The adaptive nature of the CRISPR/Cas system and the widespread occurrence of CRISPR regions in bacterial genomes suggest that this system could be the most powerful weapon possessed by bacteria to resist invasion by foreign DNA. Before our work, the only known mechanism for phages to evade CRISPR/Cas systems was by mutation, which is a low-frequency event. Here we have provided the first demonstration that the in vivo activity of a CRISPR/Cas system is profoundly inhibited by any one of five different 'anti-CRISPR' genes. The existence of anti-CRISPR genes is one possible explanation of how phages have continued to proliferate despite the ubiquity and potency of CRISPR/Cas systems. The possibility that anti-CRISPR genes are diverse and widespread among phages and other mobile genetic elements may account for the large diversity of CRISPR/Cas systems and the existence of multiple CRISPR/Cas system types within single bacterial strains. This proliferation of CRISPR/Cas systems may be driven by the concomitant proliferation and diversification of anti-CRISPR genes. This newly discovered arms race may have a profound effect on the evolution of both phage and bacterial genomes, and knowledge of anti-CRISPR genes will be crucial for understanding this process. The failure to detect anti-CRISPR genes until now may be due only to a lack of systematic searches using naturally functioning in vivo systems. Future studies to discover more anti-CRISPR genes and explain the mechanisms of their inhibition of CRISPR/Cas systems will provide new inroads for illumination of CRISPR/Cas function.

# Methods
Phage plaque formation assays. Overnight cultures of P. aeruginosa were inoculated into molten soft agar and poured onto lysogeny broth agar plates. Once solidified, 3 μl aliquots of phage lysates at tenfold dilutions were pipetted onto the agar. Plates were incubated overnight at 30 °C or 37 °C.

Lysogen construction. Phages were isolated from clinical and environmental isolates through induction with mitomycin C and subsequent plaque purification on a susceptible host. PA14 lysogens were isolated by pipetting phage lysates onto a PA14 lawn, created as described above, followed by isolation of individual colonies from the zone of clearing. Colonies were assayed for the production of the correct phage to confirm lysogeny.

Transformation efficiency assay. To construct plasmids containing protospacer sequences that are susceptible to the PA14 CRISPR/Cas system, two 42-base complementary synthetic oligonucleotides containing the protospacer were ligated to a plasmid vector, pHERD30T.

Strains and growth conditions. All bacterial strains, phages, plasmids and primers used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table 3. Pseudomonas aeruginosa UCBPP-PA14 (PA14), other P. aeruginosa isolates and E. coli DH5α were grown on lysogeny broth agar or liquid medium at 37 °C. Lysogeny broth was supplemented with gentamicin (50 μg/ml for P. aeruginosa and 15 μg/ml for E. coli) to maintain the pHERD30T plasmid or ampicillin (100 μg/ml) for E. coli and carbenicillin (300 μg/ml) for P. aeruginosa with the pHERD20T plasmid.

Phage induction and isolation. Phages were isolated from a diverse panel of 88 clinical and environmental isolates of P. aeruginosa by inducing the resident prophages in these strains. The strains were grown at 37 °C to early log phase (OD600nm = 0.5) and the DNA-damaging agent mitomycin C (3 μg/ml) was added to the culture to induce prophages. Treatment was allowed to continue until lysis was visible (approximately 4-5 h) and chloroform was added for 15 min. The lysate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min and the supernatant was kept and stored over 100 μl of chloroform at 4 °C. These lysates were subjected to plaque assays on bacterial lawns of 20 indicator strains from the initial collection. Visible plaques indicated the presence of phage originating from a given lysate. All phages were subjected to three rounds of plaque purification before further characterization.

Plaque assays. Plaque assays were conducted at 30 °C or 37 °C on lysogeny broth agar (1.5%) plates with lysogeny broth top agar (0.7%), both supplemented with MgSO4 (10 mM). One hundred and fifty microlitres of an overnight culture were mixed with molten soft agar and poured onto lysogeny broth agar plates, onto which 3 μl aliquots of phage suspensions were spotted. The observed circular zones of clearing (plaques) were due to phage replication and lysis of the bacterial host. Alternatively, full plate assays were conducted where phage and bacteria were mixed, pre-adsorbed for 15 min at 37 °C before adding to top agar and pouring. For the preparation of highly pure phage stocks, phage were precipitated with 10% (w/v) polyethylene glycol (PEG) 8000 and subjected to two caesium chloride equilibrium centrifugation gradients. These preparations were used for DNA extraction and subsequent sequencing.

Lysogen construction. Lysogens were constructed by spotting serial dilutions of phage lysate on strain PA14 and streaking out bacteria (that is, putative lysogens) from the inside of a clearing resulting from a cluster of plaques. Colonies were then screened to confirm resistance to the phage used to lysogenize the strain. The putative lysogens were grown in liquid culture, and the presence of spontaneously produced phage in the supernatant that could plaque on the original wild-type strain confirmed lysogeny. All PA14 lysogens were constructed with phages isolated from this work (i.e. JBD phages), with the exception of phages DMS3, MP22, MP29 and D3112.

DNA extraction/phage genome sequencing. Phage genomic DNA was extracted for sequencing from 500 μl of a caesium-chloride-purified phage preparation with a titre between 10¹¹ and 10¹² plaque-forming units per millilitre. Phages were disrupted and proteolysed by treatment with EDTA (20 mM), proteinase K (50 μg/ml) and SDS (0.5% w/v) at 56 °C for 1 h, then the DNA was extracted with phenol/chloroform and precipitated with ethanol. Phage genomes were sequenced with either Illumina Solexa or 454 high-throughput sequencing.

Phage genome analysis. New phage genome sequences were first analysed using BLASTn to assess general similarity to previously sequenced phages. To predict open reading frames and align multiple phages for comparison, the RAST program was used. Comparison and analysis of specific phage proteins was done using RAST, CLUSTAL or BLASTp/PSI-BLAST.

Plasmid construction. A shuttle vector that replicates in E. coli and P. aeruginosa, pHERD30T, was used for cloning and expression of genes in P. aeruginosa. This vector has an arabinose-inducible promoter and a selectable gentamicin marker. A related plasmid, pHERD20T, was used for the anti-CRISPR knockout and knockin experiments, which was ampicillin/carbenicillin selectable. Inserts were amplified by PCR. Vector and insert were digested with the indicated restriction enzymes, ligated, and the ligation mix was used to transform E. coli DH5α. All plasmid constructs were verified by sequencing using primers that annealed to sites outside the multiple cloning site. Other mutations to JBD30 gene 35 were introduced using primers. To produce versions of JBD30 gene 35 with divergent DNA sequences (JBD30-35 varA and varB), sequences containing maximal numbers of silent mutations were designed manually and synthesized. The synthesized genes were subcloned into pHERD30T by digestion with NcoI and HindIII.

Transformation efficiency assays. Oligonucleotides were synthesized to match a desired 32-base protospacer with the upstream and downstream five bases. Extra bases were added on the 5' and 3' ends of each oligonucleotide to produce NcoI and HindIII sticky ends after annealing. The oligonucleotides were annealed and ligated into the pHERD30T shuttle vector. For transformation assays into P. aeruginosa, standard electroporation protocols were used. One millilitre of an overnight culture was washed twice in 300 mM sucrose and concentrated tenfold. Subsequently, 300-500 ng of plasmid were electroporated, then the cells were incubated in antibiotic-free lysogeny broth medium for 1 h at 37 °C. Cells were plated on gentamicin (50 μg/ml) selective media and colonies were counted after overnight growth at 37 °C. The number of colonies was normalized to the dilution factor and the mass of plasmid transformed to yield transformants per microgram of DNA. The relative transformation efficiency for each protospacer was calculated as a percentage of the transformation efficiency obtained for the empty vector control.

DMS3 recombination. Wild-type phage DMS3 contains a protospacer region in gene 42 with five mismatches to the 32 nt CR2_sp1 crRNA produced by PA14. A constructed mutant DMS3 phage (DMS3m) contains five point mutations in gene 42 creating a 100% match to this crRNA. Owing to targeting by the CRISPR/Cas system, this mutant phage is unable to form plaques on wild-type PA14, with the exception of rare (fewer than 10⁻⁶) escaper mutants. Despite overall genomic similarity between phages DMS3m and JBD30, phage DMS3m does not contain an anti-CRISPR gene of its own. Therefore, DMS3m was used to generate a recombinant phage containing the anti-CRISPR gene from JBD30 (gene 35). Cells containing a pHERD20T construct containing JBD30 genes 34-38 were infected with DMS3m and recombinant phages were selected by plating on wild-type PA14. Individual plaques were picked and purified three times by re-plating on PA14, which ultimately led to the isolation of three independent recombinants. Preliminary screening involved PCR reactions with primers to the anti-CRISPR gene as well as primers to the protospacer region (gene 42) which were specific for a protospacer with 100% identity to the CR2_sp1 crRNA. Putative recombinant phages were then subject to PCR reactions and subsequent sequencing. The protospacer containing region (gene 42) was sequenced to confirm that the recombinants had maintained 100% complementarity with the CR2_sp1 crRNA. The expected site of anti-CRISPR gene recombination (between DMS3 genes 29 and 31) was amplified using primers matching phage DMS3 and this was analysed to identify the site of recombination. The anti-CRISPR gene was also sequenced in recombinant phages to confirm that it was present and in-frame.

Northern blot. Northern blots were conducted as described previously. Wild-type PA14, PA14 Δcsy4, PA14 Δcr1/cr2 (both CRISPR loci deleted, cas genes intact) and PA14 lysogens were grown in lysogeny broth. Total RNA was extracted from log-phase cultures (OD600nm = 0.8) and 5 μg total RNA were run on a 10% TBE-urea polyacrylamide gel and stained with SYBR Gold Nucleic Acid Gel Stain before transferring RNA to a nylon membrane at 200 mA for 1 h. A radiolabelled probe corresponding to the last four spacers and three repeats of the PA14 CRISPR locus was generated. Prehybridization (blocking) was conducted using 50% formamide, 5× Denhardt's, 0.5% SDS, 6× SSC and 100 μg/ml single-stranded DNA at 42 °C for 2 h. Probing was conducted at 42 °C for 16 h using fresh prehybridization buffer, but with the single-stranded DNA omitted and radiolabelled probe added. Wash solution 1 consisted of 2× SSC and 1% SDS, whereas wash solution 2 consisted of 0.2× SSC and 0.1% SDS. Wash solution 1 was used for two 10 min washes at 25 °C, two 30 min washes at 65 °C, and wash solution 2 for one 10 min wash at 25 °C. Blots were developed using a phosphor screen and imager. A low-range single-stranded RNA ladder was also used to confirm the location of 5S RNA and crRNA.

RT-qPCR. Total RNA extracts were treated with DNase to remove DNA and 1 ng of total RNA was used in a series of RT-qPCR reactions. Reactions were conducted in a qPCR cycler. For absolute quantification, a PCR reaction was conducted, amplifying genomic DNA with 'external' primers. This product was gel extracted, quantified and diluted to generate a standard curve. All RT-qPCR reactions were done with 'internal' primers that were designed to anneal inside the external primers for the purified PCR product. A housekeeping gene, rpsL, was used for relative quantification. For RT-qPCR reactions, 1 ng of total RNA was used in each reaction, performed in duplicate. Reverse transcription was conducted using a gene-specific primer to generate complementary DNA in a one-step reaction. The lack of contaminating DNA was confirmed by inclusion of controls for each sample without reverse transcriptase added.

β-Galactosidase assays. Overnight cultures were subcultured 1:100 into lysogeny broth containing 0.1% arabinose to induce anti-CRISPR gene expression from the pHERD30T plasmid, then grown at 37 °C to an attenuance (OD600nm) of 0.3-0.6. Cultures were diluted 1:1 in complete Z buffer, in triplicate. Two drops each of 0.1% SDS and chloroform were added to each sample and, after vortexing, ONPG was added. Samples were vortexed to begin the reaction, then incubated at 30 °C without shaking for 20-30 min. Absorbance measurements were taken at 420 and 550 nm, and β-galactosidase activity was calculated for each technical replicate using the Miller equation. Data are expressed relative to cells containing the pHERD30T empty vector for at least five biological replicates.

Anti-CRISPR knockout. Three independent PCR products were generated which contained overhangs, which facilitated the generation of a pHERD20T plasmid with the region from phage JBD30 that lies up and downstream of the anti-CRISPR (gene 35) with an inserted gentamicin (Gm) resistance cassette and the first 60 base pairs of gene 35 absent. All three PCR products were gel purified and amplified together in a reaction using Vent DNA Polymerase. This reaction yielded a DNA product that was gel extracted and re-amplified with Taq DNA polymerase. The pHERD20T vector was digested with EcoRI and HindIII and then infused. The mixture was used to transform E. coli DH5α using standard protocols with recovery in SOC followed by plating and selection with ampicillin. Plasmids were isolated from colonies that were both gentamicin and ampicillin-resistant and confirmed by sequencing and diagnostic restriction enzyme digestion. The plasmid containing a gentamicin resistance cassette, flanked by regions of homology to the 300 base pairs upstream and downstream of the coding region of JBD30 gene 35 was electroporated into a PA14 ΔCR/cas(JBD30) lysogen to generate recombinant phages. Isolated gentamicin resistant colonies were grown in liquid culture to allow phage production, and a cell-free phage preparation from the supernatant was used to infect ΔCR/cas cells overnight in liquid culture. Surviving cells were plated on gentamicin to select for newly formed ΔCR(JBD30) lysogens with a prophage containing the gentamicin insert in gene 35. Resulting colonies were confirmed to be gentamicin resistant and carbenicillin sensitive. The correct insertion of the gentamicin cassette in the phage genome was confirmed by PCR and DNA sequencing. To remove the cassette, pHERD20T containing JBD30 genes 34-38 with either wild-type sequence or a frameshift introduced in gene 35 was electroporated into the knockout strain under carbenicillin selection. Single colonies were grown in liquid and plaque assays conducted. The frameshift mutation in JBD30 gene 35 was introduced into pHERD20T containing JBD30 genes 34-38 with a PCR reaction.

Type I-E CRISPR/Cas system assays. Overnight cultures of E. coli BW40114 and BW40119 containing the empty vector or anti-CRISPR genes were diluted 100-fold into lysogeny broth medium containing 15 μg/ml gentamicin and grown at 37 °C for 4 h. IPTG and arabinose were then added to a final concentration of 1 mM each. The cultures were grown under induction for 2 h, then 1.5 ml of each culture was concentrated into 100 μl and mixed with 3 ml molten lysogeny broth soft agar. The mixture was poured onto thick lysogeny broth agar plates containing 15 μg/ml gentamicin, 1 mM IPTG and 1 mM arabinose. Tenfold serial dilutions of M13 phage lysate were spotted onto the plates and incubated overnight at 30 °C. Lysates which were produced from targeting cells (BW40119) containing anti-CRISPR constructs or empty vector under conditions in which the plasmid promoter was repressed or induced and analysed by SDS-PAGE to assess the expression of anti-CRISPR proteins.
