# Abstract

Intracellular lipopolysaccharide from Gram-negative bacteria including Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Shigella flexneri, and Burkholderia thailandensis activates mouse caspase-11, causing pyroptotic cell death, interleukin-1β processing, and lethal septic shock. How caspase-11 executes these downstream signalling events is largely unknown. Here we show that gasdermin D is essential for caspase-11-dependent pyroptosis and interleukin-1β maturation. A forward genetic screen with ethyl N-nitrosourea-mutagenized mice links Gsdmd to the intracellular lipopolysaccharide response. Macrophages from Gsdmd-/- mice generated by gene targeting also exhibit defective pyroptosis and interleukin-1β secretion induced by cytoplasmic lipopolysaccharide or Gram-negative bacteria. In addition, Gsdmd-/- mice are protected from a lethal dose of lipopolysaccharide. Mechanistically, caspase-11 cleaves gasdermin D, and the resulting amino-terminal fragment promotes both pyroptosis and NLRP3-dependent activation of caspase-1 in a cell-intrinsic manner. Our data identify gasdermin D as a critical target of caspase-11 and a key mediator of the host response against Gram-negative bacteria.

# Introduction

Cytoplasmic caspase-11 (also known as caspase-4) defines the non-canonical inflammasome that is activated by various Gram-negative bacterial infections and causes infected cells to die by pyroptosis. Caspase-11 also triggers NLRP3- and ASC-dependent activation of caspase-1, resulting in the proteolytic maturation of the inactive cytokine pro-interleukin (IL)-1β. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is the bacterial pathogen-associated molecular pattern that promotes caspase-11 activation. Cytoplasmic LPS can directly bind to and activate caspase-11 independently of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), but precisely how caspase-11 executes pyroptosis and non-canonical NLRP3 inflammasome activation has remained unknown.

# Main

## Phenomics identifies gasdermin D

An unbiased forward genetic screen with ethyl N-nitrosourea (ENU)-mutagenized mice was performed to unveil essential mediators of non-canonical inflammasome signalling in response to cytoplasmic LPS. Pedigree IGL1351 had a Mendelian recessive mutation that compromised LPS-induced IL-1β secretion from peritoneal macrophages. The severity of the defect was equivalent to that seen with the Casp11 mutant 129 strain. Importantly, IL-1β secretion by pedigree IGL1351 in response to Clostridium difficile toxin B (TcdB), a stimulant of the Mediterranean fever/Pyrin canonical inflammasome, was comparable to other pedigrees. Exome sequencing identified 39 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the ENU-mutated founder G1 male. Subsequent genotyping of all identified SNVs in a large cohort of siblings and offspring revealed that the trait was completely correlated with inheritance of a point mutation in the gene encoding gasdermin D (Gsdmd).

Gsdmd is a 487 amino acid cytoplasmic protein that contains an ill-characterized gasdermin domain and lacks any obvious signal peptide or transmembrane segments. The human gasdermin gene family consists of GSDMA, GSDMB, GSDMC and GSDMD. The physiological role of Gsdmd is unknown, although other gasdermin family members have been implicated in deafness or apoptosis in epithelial cells. The ENU-derived mutation in Gsdmd caused an Ile to Asn amino acid substitution at position 105 with a Polyphen score of 0.98 (probably damaging) and a SIFT (sorting intolerant from tolerant) score of 0.00 (deleterious). Full-length Gsdmd protein (53 kDa) was immunoblotted in unstimulated wild-type bone-marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs). Unlike pro-caspase-11, Gsdmd was not induced to any great extent by TLR agonists or interferons. Wild-type and Gsdmd I105N/I105N BMDMs expressed comparable amounts of Gsdmd, suggesting that the I105N mutation impairs Gsdmd function rather than protein expression.

Wild-type, Casp11-/-, or Gsdmd I105N/I105N BMDMs that were primed with Pam3CSK4 and then stimulated with canonical inflammasome stimuli, including ATP to engage the NLRP3-dependent inflammasome, poly(dA:dT) double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) to activate the AIM2-dependent inflammasome, or TcdB, secreted comparable amounts of IL-1β and exhibited similar levels of pyroptotic death. Consistent with these data, Gsdmd I105N/I105N BMDMs displayed normal induction of NLRP3, pro-IL-1β, and RANTES cytokine in response to TLR agonists. Gsdmd I105N/I105N BMDMs also upregulated pro-caspase-11 normally but, in contrast to their wild-type counterparts, were defective in IL-1β secretion, and did not undergo pyroptosis in response to cytoplasmic LPS. Proteolytic processing of caspase-1 and pro-IL-1β preceding IL-1β secretion was also impaired, suggesting that Gsdmd is critical for all caspase-11-dependent signalling events.

## Gsdmd is essential for caspase-11 signalling

We confirmed a critical role for Gsdmd in non-canonical inflammasome signalling using gene-targeted Gsdmd-/- mice. In control experiments, Pam3CSK4-primed wild-type, Gsdmd-/-, and Casp11-/- BMDMs exhibited equivalent caspase-1-dependent IL-1β secretion and pyroptosis after a 16 h treatment with TcdB, ATP, dsDNA, or the NLRC4 inflammasome trigger flagellin. The effect of Gsdmd deficiency on caspase-1-dependent pyroptosis at earlier time points is discussed in a later section. Caspase-11 or Gsdmd deficiency also had no effect on IL-1β secretion in response to other canonical NLRP3 inflammasome stimuli including listeriolysin O (LLO) toxin, monosodium urate (MSU), lysomotropic agent HLLOMe, or calcium pyrophosphate (CPPD). In keeping with these data, TLR agonists induced NLRP3, pro-caspase-11, and RANTES to a similar extent in wild-type and Gsdmd-/- BMDMs. Therefore, Gsdmd is dispensable for normal TLR priming. Gsdmd-/- BMDMs were, however, resistant to pyroptosis and failed to secrete IL-1β when transfected with E. coli LPS or synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A, the active moiety of LPS. Gsdmd-/- BMDMs were also unresponsive to electroporated LPS, or LPS transfected with cholera toxin B complex, or S. typhimurium LPS. Gsdmd, like Casp11, was also required for processing of pro-caspase-1 and pro-IL-1β in response to cytoplasmic LPS. Finally, Gsdmd-/- BMDMs further resembled Casp11-/- BMDMs in failing to secrete IL-1β or undergo pyroptosis upon infection with Gram-negative bacteria (E. coli, Citrobacter rodentium, or Shigella flexneri), whereas both genotypes responded normally to Pseudomonas aeruginosa that activates the NLRC4 canonical inflammasome. Collectively, these data confirm that macrophages require Gsdmd for pyroptosis and IL-1β secretion in response to cytoplasmic LPS.

Human caspase-4 and caspase-5, the orthologues of mouse caspase-11, induce pyroptosis in myeloid and endothelial cells in response to intracellular LPS. Like caspase-4/5/11, Gsdmd is specific to mammals, suggesting a co-emergence of those genes. Human GSDMD exhibits 58% amino acid sequence identity with mouse Gsdmd. Deletion of GSDMD or CASP4 by CRISPR/Cas9 in human EA.hy926 endothelial cells or human THP-1 monocytes did not affect death induced by APO2L or dsDNA, but it completely abolished intracellular LPS-induced cytotoxicity. Thus, human GSDMD is required for the caspase-4-dependent response to cytoplasmic LPS.

## Caspase-11 cleaves and activates Gsdmd

We next questioned how Gsdmd promotes pyroptosis and caspase-1 activation by the non-canonical inflammasome. We noticed that BMDMs transfected with LPS exhibited caspase-11-dependent cleavage of Gsdmd, giving rise to a 30-kDa N-terminal Gsdmd fragment. These data identified Gsdmd as a potential substrate of caspase-11. Recombinant caspase-11 cleaves artificial peptide substrates after an aspartate residue, but physiological substrates of caspase-11 are not well defined. Purified recombinant Gsdmd was cleaved by recombinant caspase-11 in vitro into two fragments. Edman sequencing mapped the cleavage site in Gsdmd to LLSD276/G277. The P1-Asp cleavage residue and P1' residues are conserved across species. Ectopic expression of the N-terminal Gsdmd cleavage fragment (mouse residues 1-276) killed HEK293T cells, whereas expression of full-length Gsdmd or the C-terminal cleavage fragment did not. Collectively, these data indicate that caspase-11 directly cleaves the 53-kDa inactive precursor form of Gsdmd (pro-Gsdmd) to generate the pro-pyroptotic N-terminal fragment (Gsdmd p30). In full-length Gsdmd, the C terminus may mask key sites in the N terminus until cleavage at D276/G277 releases this inhibition. Consistent with this notion, reconstitution of immortalized Gsdmd-/- macrophages with wild-type Gsdmd restored LPS responsiveness, as evidenced by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release, IL-1β secretion and caspase-1 processing, whereas reconstitution with the Gsdmd processing mutant D276A did not. In addition, mutation of Gsdmd within the p30 fragment (I105N) attenuated pyroptosis and caspase-1/IL-1β processing without affecting Gsdmd cleavage. These data confirm that conversion of pro-Gsdmd to its mature p30 form by caspase-11 is essential for both pyroptosis and caspase-1 activation in response to cytoplasmic LPS.

Cytoplasmic LPS also caused caspase-4-dependent processing of GSDMD in human THP-1 monocytes. Furthermore, transient overexpression of caspase-4 or caspase-5 caused human GSDMD cleavage to the pro-pyroptotic p30 fragment. These data together with the conserved P1 and P1' residues in GSDMD indicate a conserved mechanism of GSDMD activation by caspase-4/5/11.

Cytoplasmic LPS induces caspase-11-dependent pyroptosis and secretion of IL-1β, but only the latter requires caspase-1, NLRP3 and ASC. Loss of NLRP3, ASC, or caspase-1 in BMDMs did not markedly affect caspase-11-dependent generation of mature Gsdmd p30 in response to cytoplasmic LPS, indicating that Gsdmd cleavage occurs upstream of NLRP3 inflammasome activation. The question arises as to whether Gsdmd induces pyroptosis and NLRP3 inflammasome activation simultaneously in the same cell, or if Gsdmd-mediated pyroptosis releases damage-associated molecular patterns that trigger caspase-11-independent NLRP3 inflammasome activation in neighbouring cells. We believe the latter hypothesis is unlikely because LPS-stimulated Il1b-/- BMDMs exhibited normal pyroptosis, yet their culture supernatant failed to induce IL-1β secretion from Casp11-/- BMDMs. In addition, Casp11-/- BMDMs co-cultured with Il1b-/- BMDMs did not secrete IL-1β in response to cytoplasmic LPS, making it unlikely that a paracrine signalling mechanism activates the NLRP3 inflammasome. Collectively, our data demonstrate that Gsdmd maturation by caspase-11 triggers two distinct cell-intrinsic signals: (i) pyroptosis induction; and (ii) NLRP3-dependent caspase-1 activation.

## Role for Gsdmd in canonical pyroptosis

Human caspase-1 is reported to cleave GSDMD at the same P1-Asp residue as caspase-11, albeit that the preferred tetrapeptide cleavage sequence of caspase-1 differs from that of caspase-11. Consistent with this study, the Gsdmd p30 fragment appeared in BMDMs treated with canonical inflammasome activators including ATP. Although Gsdmd-/- BMDMs stimulated with ATP or flagellin underwent pyroptosis normally after 8 h, they exhibited less pyroptosis than wild-type BMDMs at earlier time points. These data suggest that Gsdmd is also a physiological substrate of caspase-1. However, given that caspase-1-dependent pyroptosis is delayed rather than prevented, we believe that other ill-defined caspase-1 substrates can also mediate pyroptosis. This notion is in keeping with the fact that caspase-1 orthologues are found in vertebrates including non-mammals, whereas caspase-4/5/11 and Gsdmd are exclusive to mammals. Consistent with IL-1β being a direct substrate of caspase-1, Gsdmd deficiency did not impact caspase-1-dependent IL-1β processing in response to ATP. However, Gsdmd-/- BMDMs secreted less IL-1β than wild-type at the 2-h time points in response to ATP and flagellin. Gsdmd may contribute to IL-1β release by damaging cell membranes or regulating the ill-characterized IL-1β secretion mechanism.

## Gsdmd is essential for lethal sepsis

We investigated the relevance of our in vitro findings in a mouse model of acute septic shock wherein caspase-11-dependent pyroptosis leads to lethal endotoxemia. Mice lacking either Casp11 or Gsdmd were resistant to LPS-induced lethal septic shock. This result is consistent with Gsdmd being a critical pro-pyroptotic substrate of caspase-11 in vivo.

# Discussion

Pyroptosis plays an important role in anti-bacterial innate immune defence and lethal endotoxemia, but how inflammatory caspases 1, 4, 5 and 11 cause pyroptosis has remained unknown. Our data reveal that proteolytic cleavage of Gsdmd by mouse caspase-11 or human caspase-4 is essential for pyroptosis of innate immune cells and endothelial cells harbouring LPS-tainted cytoplasm. Cleaved Gsdmd also triggers NLRP3-dependent activation of caspase-1 through a cell-intrinsic pathway, although the exact mechanism responsible for NLRP3 activation remains unclear. NLRP3 senses diverse stimuli that perturb intracellular homeostasis, so its activation may be an indirect consequence of the effects of the Gsdmd p30 fragment. Future studies will need to address exactly what the p30 fragment does in cells. The redefined non-canonical inflammasome signalling pathway refutes the previous hypothesis that a caspase-1/11 complex is responsible for caspase-1 activation.

The partial contribution of Gsdmd to caspase-1-dependent pyroptosis suggests the existence of other pro-pyroptotic caspase-1 substrates. Caspase-1 can trigger pyroptosis in the absence of Gsdmd, which is not unexpected because non-mammalian vertebrates lack Gsdmd yet still exhibit caspase-1-dependent pyroptosis. The co-emergence of caspase-4/5/11 and Gsdmd genes in the early stages of mammalian evolution might indicate co-evolution, perhaps in response to the need for additional anti-pathogen responses against Gram-negative bacteria.

Like other caspases, caspase-11 cleaves multiple substrates. However, our in vitro and in vivo data show that caspase-11 relies exclusively on Gsdmd to promote pyroptosis, caspase-1 activation and LPS-induced lethal sepsis. Thus Gsdmd is revealed as an unexpected, but critical facet of the anti-bacterial response.

# Methods

ENU-mutagenized mouse strains. Third-generation (G3) offspring used for the phenotypic screen were from ENU-treated C57BL/6 mice as described. 129X1/ SvJ strain was used as a Casp11 mutant 1 control. All animals were housed under specific-pathogen-free conditions at the Australian Phenomics Facility. Animal experiments were approved by the Australian National University Animal Ethics and Experimentation Committee.

Exome capture and sequencing of G1 founder. Exome-enriched, paired-end libraries were prepared from genomic DNA of first generation (G1) mice using the Agilent SureSelect XT2 Mouse All Exon kit (Agilent) following the manufacturer's instructions. Each sample was prepared with an index and then pooled in a batch of six in equimolar amounts before exome enrichment. Each 6-plex exome-enriched library was sequenced in one lane of an Illumina HiSeq2000 with version 2 chemistry as 100-bp paired-end reads. ENU variants were identified as described previously. In brief, sequence reads were mapped to the GRCm38 assembly of the reference mouse genome using the default parameters of the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner. Untrimmed reads were aligned allowing a maximum of two sequence mismatches and were discarded where they aligned to the genome more than once. Sequence variants were identified with SAMtools and annotated using Annovar. PolyPhen2 and SIFT were used for the calculation of variant effect. Variants were filtered to prioritize novel variants not in dbsnp (or in a list of common mouse variants identified by the pipeline) and predicted to be deleterious to the protein by PolyPhen and/or SIFT. For variant validation, G1 samples were genotyped for the ENU variants identified by the exome sequencing using a competitive, allele-specific dual FRET-based assay, KASP (LGC). For genotyping of G3 offspring and IGL1351 pedigree, primers were designed based on the SNV locus-flanking sequence. Plates were read in a FLUOStar Optima (BMG Labtechnologies) plate reader.

Other mice. Nlrp3-/-, Asc-/-, and Casp11-/- mice on a C57BL/6N background were described previously. Il1b-/- mice generated from AB2.2 ES cells (129S7) were obtained from Taconic and backcrossed to C57BL/6J up to the N10 generation. C57BL/6-type Casp11 genotype was confirmed by PCR as described. Gsdmd-/- mice were obtained by cytoplasmic injection of C57BL/6N zygotes with 25 ng/μl wild-type Cas9 mRNA (Life Technologies) and 13 ng/μl in vitro-transcribed single-guide RNA (gRNA) prepared by MEGAshortscript T7 Kit (Life Technologies). Tail DNA from resulting offspring was analysed by PCR and sequencing. Target sequences of gRNA are 5'-GAGAAGGGAAAATTTCTGG (G9) and 5'-AGGGCAGAGTGATGTTGTC (G2). Casp1-/- mice lacking exons 1 and 2 were generated at Genentech from gene-targeted C57BL/6N C2 ES cells. Casp1-/- mice were genotyped with PCR primers yielding a 167-bp wild-type DNA fragment and a 287-bp mutant DNA fragment. The Genentech Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all animal studies.

Reagents and antibodies. Ultra-pure LPS (E. coli O111:B4), Pam3CSK4, poly(I:C) LMW, R837 (Imiquimod), dsDNA (poly(dA:dT)), ultra-pure flagellin (P. aeruginosa), MSU, and CPPD were from Invivogen. Other reagents were synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A (Enzo Life Sciences), TcdB, cholera toxin B (Ctb; List Biological Laboratories), LLO toxin (ReagentProteins), HLLOMe (Chem Impex International), IFNa, (PBL Assay Science), IFNc (eBioscience), and ATP (Sigma). LPS from S. typhimurium was described previously. Antibodies used include: mouse caspase-1 (clone 4B4, Genentech), human caspase-1 (Bally-1, AdipoGen), caspase-4 (4B9, Enzo Life Sciences), caspase-5 (4429, Cell Signaling Technology), caspase-11 (clone 17D9, Novus Biologicals), Gsdmd (G7422 anti-Gsdmd aa 126-138, Sigma), IL-1β (GTX74034, GeneTex), NLRP3 (clone Cryo-2, AdipoGen), and Flag epitope (M2, Sigma).

Macrophage cultures. Bone marrow cells were differentiated in DMEM supplemented with 10% endotoxin-free fetal bovine serum (Omega Scientific) and 20% M-CSF-conditioned medium for 5-6 days. Adherent BMDMs or thioglycollate-elicited peritoneal macrophages were cultured overnight in 96-well plates at 1 x 10^6 cells per ml before being primed for 5-6 h with 1 μg/ml Pam3CSK4 in OPTIMEM (Life Technologies). Primed cells were transfected with 2 μg/ml LPS or 5 μg/ml lipid A by using 0.25% v/v FuGENE HD (Promega) or 20 μg/ml Ctb, or electroporated with 2 μg/ml LPS by using the 4D-Nucleofector system (Lonza) as described previously. Unless specified, FuGENE HD was used for the LPS transfection. The other conditions for inflammasome activations were 5mM ATP, 100 ng/ml TcdB, 2 μg/ml dsDNA plus 0.1% v/v Lipofectamine 2000 (Life Technologies), 0.5 μg/ml flagellin plus 0.25% v/v FuGENE HD, 1 mg/ml MSU, 500 μg/ml CPPD, and 1 mM HLLOMe. Infections with P. aeruginosa (ATCC 27853; multiplicity of infection (MOI) 25), E. coli (ATCC 11775, MOI 30), C. rodentium (ATCC 51116, MOI 20), or S. flexneri (ATCC 9199, MOI 20) were for 1.5 h and then cultures were supplemented with 100 μg/ml Gentamycin (Life Technologies). For stimulation with TLR agonists or interferons, BMDMs were cultured with 1 μg/ml Pam3CSK4, 5 μg/ml polyI:C, 5 μg/ml LPS, 2 μg/ml R848, 75 ng/ml IFNa, or 500 ng/ml IFNc for the indicated periods. ELISAs were used to measure IL-1β (Meso Scale Discovery) in culture supernatants. A CytoTox 96 Non-Radioactive Cytotoxicity assay (Promega) measured cell death. For measuring RANTES, Luminex assay (Bio-Rad) was used. Each figure legend shows the number of samples per experiment and number of experiments that were analysed independently. For immunoblotting, cells were lysed with RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 1 x Complete Protease Inhibitor (Roche), 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS). For cleavage studies (Gsdmd p30, caspase-1 p20, and IL-1β p17), pooled culture supernatants and cell extracts were precipitated with 7.2% trichloroacetic acid plus 0.15% sodium deoxycholate.

Recombinant proteins. DNA encoding Flag-tagged caspase-11 (residues 2-373) and His6-MBP-tagged murine Gsdmd (residues 2-487) were generated by gene synthesis, and subcloned into a modified version of pAcgp67 (BD Biosciences). Transfer vectors were co-transfected with BestBac linearized viral DNA (Expression Systems) into Sf9 cells (Life Technologies) using Transit-IT-Insect transfection reagent (Mirus Bio) to produce recombinant baculovirus. The virus was amplified twice to prepare the stock used for protein expression. Protein was expressed in Tni pro cells (Expression Systems). A 22 l Wave bioreactor was inoculated with Tni pro cells at 1 x 10^6 cells per ml in serum-free ESF921 (Expression Systems). At 48 h post infection, the Tni cells were harvested and frozen at -80 °C. For the purification of Gsdmd, the baculovirus cell pellets were thawed and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 1 mM TCEP plus Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche)). The cell lysate was loaded onto a 3 ml NiNTA column (QIAGEN) pre-equilibrated with buffer A (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, 0.5 mM TCEP). The column was washed with 20 column volumes buffer A, then eluted with 5 column volumes of buffer B (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 250 mM imidazole, 0.5 mM TCEP). The elutant was then loaded onto a 5 ml MBP column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) pre-equilibrated with buffer C (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM TCEP). The MBP column was washed with 15 column volumes of buffer C. Gsdmd protein was eluted with buffer C containing 10 mM maltose. To cleave off His-MBP tag, purified His6-MBP-tagged Gsdmd was digested with TEV (Sigma). Un-cleaved Gsdmd and TEV enzyme were removed by passing through a 3 ml NiNTA column. For the purification of caspase-11, the baculovirus cell pellets were thawed and lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP plus protease inhibitor cocktail) for 1 h.

Recombinant Gsdmd processing assay. Recombinant Gsdmd (4 μM) was incubated in the presence or absence of 2 μM recombinant caspase-11 at 37 °C for 30 min in standard caspase reaction buffer (20 mM PIPES pH 7.2, 10% sucrose, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% CHAPS, 1 mM EDTA, 10mM DTT). Samples were then subjected to SDS-page followed by Coomassie blue staining. For Edman degradation analysis, samples were blotted onto a PVDF after SDS-page electrophoresis, and the band corresponding to the Gsdmd protein fragment was subjected to N-terminal sequencing using traditional Edman chemistries on a 494HT Procise sequencer (Applied Biosystems) with fast cycles.

Plasmids and transient expression. cDNAs encoding Gsdmd (human and mouse), human caspase-4, and caspase-5 were artificially synthesized with a Flag epitope and subcloned into pcDNA3.1/Zeo for transient expression in HEK293T cells, or into pLenti6.3/V5-DEST (Life Technologies) for lentivirus production. Human codon-optimized Cas9 was synthesized and subcloned into pLenti7.3 (Life Technologies). Mutagenesis of cDNAs was performed with a QuikChange site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies). For transient expression, HEK293T cells were cultured overnight in 96-well plates at 1.2 x 10^5 cells per ml, then transfected with 2-10 ng of plasmids by using 0.16 μl Lipofectamine 2000. At 24 h after transfection, cytotoxicity against HEK293T cells was measured by CellTiter-Glo. For human GSDMD processing, HEK293T cells that stably express human GSDMD were selected using 1 mg/ml Zeocin after transfection with human GSDMD plasmid. The stable transfectant cells were transiently transfected with 20 ng of human caspase-4 or -5 plasmids as described above. At 24 h after transfection, cells were lysed with RIPA buffer for immunoblotting. HEK293T cell lines used were regularly tested for mycoplasma. All cell lines used were authenticated by short tandem repeat (STR) profiling, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) fingerprinting, and mycoplasma testing.

Knockout cell lines. Human EA.hy926 endothelial cells and human THP-1 monocytes were lentivirally transduced with Cas9 and single-cell cloned. gRNAs were transduced into Cas9+ cloned lines by lentiviral delivery with pLKO.1 vector (Sigma) followed by selection of gRNA-expressing cells by Puromycin (Life Technologies). At 11-14 days post-selection, cells were harvested for experiments. The target sequences of gRNA used are 5'-GTTGGCTTCCTGGGCTGCTA for human CD81 (control), 5'-GCATGCGAGAATCTCACGC for luciferase (control), 5'-GGTGTTTTGGATAACTTGG for CASP4 knockout, 5'-GTAGTCCGGAGAGTGGTCC for human GSDMD knockout (gRNA1), and 5'-AACCACCAGGCAGTAGGGC for human GSDMD knockout (gRNA2). EA.hy926 cells were transfected with 10 μg/ml LPS by 0.5% v/v Lipofectamine 2000 or treated with 100 ng/ml APO2L. At 24 h after stimulation, cytotoxicity against EA.hy926 was measured by CellTiter-Glo. THP-1 cells were primed with 0.5 μg/ml Pam3CSK4 for 4 h, then plated in 96-well plates at 1 x 10^6 cells per ml with OPTIMEM containing 0.5 μg/ml Pam3CSK4, followed by transfection of 2 μg/ml dsDNA with 0.125% v/v Lipofectamine 2000. For LPS electroporation into Pam3CSK4-primed THP-1 cells, the Neon transfection system (Life Technologies) was used with 1 x 10^6 cells plus LPS 0.1 μg per chamber condition. All the cell lines used were regularly tested for mycoplasma. All cell lines used were authenticated by STR profiling, SNP fingerprinting, and mycoplasma testing.

Gsdmd reconstitution. Macrophage progenitor cells from Gsdmd-/- mice were immortalized by ER-Hoxb8 as described previously. The immortalized macrophage progenitor cells were lentivirally transduced with cDNA encoding either wild-type or D276A mouse Gsdmd using pLenti6.3/V5DEST vector. Cells were selected in 6.25 μg/ml Blasticidin and differentiated in M-CSF-containing conditioned media. Stimulation of ER-Hoxb8-immortalized macrophages was performed as described above. All Hoxb cell lines used were regularly tested for mycoplasma.

Endotoxic shock model. Female mice aged 8-10 weeks were injected intraperitoneally with 54 mg/kg LPS (E. coli O111:B4, Sigma) and monitored eight times daily for a total of 6 days. Gsdmd-/- mice used are described in Extended Data. Statistical analysis was performed with log-rank (Mantel-Cox) tests using Prism, and P values were adjusted to account for multiple comparisons using Bonferroni's correction. Sample sizes were chosen by standard methods to ensure adequate power and no mice were excluded from the analysis. No randomization or blinding was used for the animal studies. No statistical method was used to estimate sample size. The Genentech Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all animal studies.
