# Cerebral Organoids Model Human Brain Development and Microcephaly

# Abstract

The complexity of the human brain has made it difficult to study many brain disorders in model organisms, and highlights the need for an in vitro model of human brain development. We have developed a human pluripotent stem cell-derived 3D organoid culture system, termed cerebral organoid, which develops various discrete though interdependent brain regions. These include cerebral cortex containing progenitor populations that organize and produce mature cortical neuron subtypes. Furthermore, cerebral organoids recapitulate features of human cortical development, namely characteristic progenitor zone organization with abundant outer radial glial stem cells. Finally, we use RNAi and patient-specific iPS cells to model microcephaly, a disorder that has been difficult to recapitulate in mice. We demonstrate premature neuronal differentiation in patient organoids, a defect that could explain the disease phenotype. Our data demonstrate that 3D organoids can recapitulate development and disease of even this most complex human tissue.

# Introduction

Mammalian brain development begins with expansion of the neuroepithelium to generate radial glia (RG). These RGs divide at the apical surface within the ventricular zone (VZ) to generate neurons and intermediate progenitors (IPs). IPs populate the adjacent subventricular zone (SVZ) while neurons migrate through the intermediate zone (IZ) to populate specific layers within the cortical plate (CP). In humans, the organization of progenitor zones is markedly more elaborate; the SVZ is split by an inner fiber layer (IFL) into inner (ISVZ) and outer SVZ (OSVZ). The OSVZ represents an entirely separate progenitor layer populated by IPs and a unique stem cell termed outer radial glia (oRG), which are only present to a limited degree in rodents. Both the IFL and OSVZ are completely absent in mice. These key differences allow for the striking expansion in neuronal output and brain size seen in humans.

Primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a neurodevelopmental disorder in which brain size is markedly reduced. Autosomal recessive mutations have been identified in several genes, all of which encode proteins localizing to the mitotic spindle apparatus. Heretofore, MCPH pathogenesis has primarily been examined in mouse models. However, mouse mutants for several of the known genes have failed to recapitulate the severely reduced brain size seen in human patients.

Given the dramatic differences between mice and humans, methods that recapitulate paradigms of human brain development in vitro have enormous potential. While significant progress has been made for in vitro models of whole organ development for other systems, such as intestine, pituitary, and retina, a 3D culture model of the developing brain as a whole has not been established. Previous studies have modeled certain isolated neural tissues in vitro, including dorsal cerebral cortical tissue, which could recapitulate many aspects of early development. However, later events such as the formation of discrete cortical layers with stereotypic inside-out organization as well as human characteristics, such as the presence of oRG cells and the unique organization of progenitor zones, were not described.

Here, we describe a 3D culture system for deriving brain tissue in vitro. These so-called cerebral organoids develop a variety of regional identities organized as discrete domains capable of influencing one another. Furthermore, cerebral cortical regions display an organization similar to the developing human brain at early stages, as well as the presence of a considerable oRG population. Moreover, cerebral cortical neurons mature to form various pyramidal identities with modest spatial separation. Finally, we utilize patient-derived iPSCs and shRNA in these organoids to model CDK5RAP2 dependent pathogenesis of microcephaly, a disorder that has been difficult to model in mice.

# Main

## Generation of cerebral organoids

Recent progress with in vitro models of various organ systems has demonstrated the enormous self-organizing capacity for pluripotent stem cells to form whole tissues. We built upon this concept and developed a protocol without the use of patterning growth factors, focusing instead on improving growth conditions and providing the environment necessary for intrinsic cues to influence development. We began with a modified approach to generate neuroectoderm from embryoid bodies. Neuroectodermal tissues were then maintained in 3D culture and embedded in droplets of Matrigel to provide a scaffold for more complex tissue growth. These Matrigel droplets were then transferred to a spinning bioreactor to enhance nutrient absorption. This method led to rapid development of brain tissues, which we termed cerebral organoids, requiring only 8-10 days for the appearance of neural identity and 20-30 days for defined brain regions to form.

Cerebral organoids at early stages (15-20 days) formed large, continuous neuroepithelia surrounding a fluid-filled cavity reminiscent of a ventricle with characteristic apical localization of the neural specific N-cadherin. Furthermore, the neuroepithelium was larger and more continuous than tissues generated using a stationary approach, which instead formed an aggregate of several small rosette-like neuroepithelia.

Although tissues reached maximal size by 2 months, cerebral organoids formed large (up to 4 mm in diameter), complex heterogeneous tissues, which could survive indefinitely (currently up to 10 months) when maintained in a spinning bioreactor. Histological and gross morphological analysis revealed regions reminiscent of cerebral cortex, choroid plexus, retina, and meninges. Importantly, tissues typically reached a size limit likely due to the lack of a circulatory system and limitations in oxygen and nutrient exchange. Consistent with this, extensive cell death was visible in the core of these tissues, whereas the various brain regions developed along the exterior. Furthermore, cerebral organoids could be reproducibly generated with similar overall morphology and complexity from both human ES cells and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs).

## Cerebral organoids display discrete brain regions

Brain development in vivo exhibits a striking degree of heterogeneity and regionalization as well as interdependency of various brain regions. Histological analysis suggested that human cerebral organoids might similarly display heterogeneous brain regions. To further examine this, we first tested the efficiency of initial neural induction in these tissues by performing RT-PCR for several markers of pluripotency and neural identity. As expected, pluripotency markers Oct4 and Nanog diminished during the course of organoid differentiation, while neural identity markers Sox1 and Pax6 were upregulated, indicating successful neural induction.

To test for early brain regionalization in whole organoids, we performed RT-PCR for forebrain (BF1 and Six3) and hindbrain (Krox20 and Isl1) markers, revealing the presence of both populations within the tissue. However, as tissue development proceeded, forebrain markers remained highly expressed while hindbrain markers decreased, reminiscent of the developmental expansion of forebrain tissue during human brain development.

In order to test whether cells with these brain region identities developed as discrete regions within the organoids, as gross morphology would suggest, or were randomly interspersed within the tissue, we performed immunohistochemical staining for markers of forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain identities during early development of these tissues (16 days). Pax6 expression revealed several regions of forebrain identity, and Otx1/2 expression marked forebrain/midbrain identity. These regions were located adjacent to regions lacking these markers but positive for hindbrain markers Gbx2, Krox20, and Pax2, which was reminiscent of the early midhindbrain boundary, suggesting similar regional communication and likely mutual repression.

In vivo brain development involves increasing refinement of regional specification. Therefore, we examined further developed cerebral organoid tissues for regional subspecification. We performed staining for the forebrain marker FoxG1, which labeled regions displaying typical cerebral cortical morphology. Many of these regions were also positive for Emx1, indicating dorsal cortical identity. We also tested for further subregionalization by staining for cortical lobe markers, namely Auts2, a marker of prefrontal cortex, Tshz2, a marker of the occipital lobe, and Lmo4, a marker of frontal and occipital lobes but absent in parietal. These markers could be seen in neurons labeling distinct regions of dorsal cortex, suggesting subspecification of cortical lobes.

Furthermore, staining for markers of hippocampus and ventral forebrain, revealed specification of these regions, although they did not organize to form the overall structure seen in vivo. Strikingly, interneurons produced in ventral forebrain regions exhibited a morphology and location consistent with migration from ventral to dorsal tissues. Within dorsal cortex, these neurons displayed neurites parallel to the apical surface, reminiscent of the migratory extensions seen in tangential migration in vivo. Notably, Calretinin positive interneurons were absent from dorsal cortex of organoids lacking a ventral region (4/4 Nkx2.1 negative organoids), suggesting interneurons originate in ventral forebrain to migrate to the dorsal cortex. This suggests distant regions can influence one another in developing cerebral organoids.

Finally, other brain structures could be observed, namely choroid plexus and even immature retina. Overall, all tissues examined displayed regions with dorsal cortical morphology (35/35, 100%), most displayed choroid plexus (25/35, 71%) and several displayed ventral forebrain identity as determined by Nkx2.1 immunoreactivity (12/35, 34%), whereas only a few displayed retinal tissue (determined by presence of retinal pigmented epithelium, 4/35, 11%). These results suggest that cerebral organoids developed a variety of brain region identities organized into discrete, though interdependent, domains.

## Recapitulation of dorsal cortical organization

The most dramatic changes in brain evolution from rodent to human affect the dorsal cortex. Therefore, we analyzed the organization of dorsal cortical regions within cerebral organoids. Staining for markers of RGs and newborn neurons revealed typical organization into a layer reminiscent of the VZ with neurons located at the basal surface. Staining for Tbr1 revealed proper development of neural identity and radial migration to the developing preplate (precursor to CP). Furthermore, staining for neural progenitor and neural specific BAF components revealed the characteristic switch in chromatin remodeling complexes during neural fate specification. Finally, staining for the IP marker Tbr2 revealed the presence of IPs adjacent to the VZ. Thus, dorsal cortical tissues displayed typical progenitor zone organization.

In both mice and humans, cortical progenitors undergo a stereotypical nuclear movement called interkinetic nuclear migration (IKNM). Mitotic divisions occur at the apical surface of the VZ while nuclei of cells in S-phase are located on the basal side of the VZ. We stained for the mitotic marker phospho-histone H3 (PH3) and observed the majority of cells dividing at the apical surface. Similar observations were evident when we stained for phospho-Vimentin, a marker of mitotic RGs. In addition, since this marker labels the entire cell, we could observe basal cellular processes typical of RGs, which extended to the outer surface of these tissues. Thus, RGs of cerebral organoids exhibited typical behavior and morphological features.

To examine this in more detail, we used a method to label individual RGs for morphology and live imaging experiments. In the mouse brain, individual cells can be labeled by in utero electroporation of fluorescent protein-expressing plasmids. Similarly, we injected GFP plasmid into fluid filled cavities of cerebral organoids and electroporated RGs adjacent to these ventricle-like cavities. This approach led to reproducible expression of GFP in RGs revealing typical morphology at various stages of development: early pseudostratified neuroepithelium followed by later bipolar morphology with extended apical and basal processes.

To test for IKNM, we performed live imaging of GFP electroporated RGs in cerebral organoids and observed many examples of RGs that displayed movement of the cell body along the apical and basal processes. Furthermore, we performed pulse-chase experiments with the S-phase marker BrdU and could observe a shift in RG nuclei from outer VZ localization towards the apical surface with time.

RGs in the VZ of rodents exhibit biased spindle orientation, predominantly horizontal, parallel to the ventricular surface. To examine whether RGs in human cerebral organoids exhibited a similar orientation bias, we used P-Vimentin staining to examine the plane of division in mitotic RGs. We observed mainly horizontal orientations (41%), somewhat similar to the orientation bias observed in other mammals. However, we also observed abundant oblique (37%) and vertical (22%) orientations, which were more abundant in these human tissues than has been described for rodent neocortex. Interestingly, these measurements reflected the same trend recently described in the human brain, suggesting the cerebral organoids could recapitulate aspects of human cortical development.

We further examined the fate potential of these divisions to test whether organoid RGs could divide symmetrically and/or asymmetrically. We performed electroporation of GFP followed by a short 1-hour BrdU pulse and a 16-hour chase to lineage trace divisions of a small minority of cells. We examined double-labeled daughter cell pairs and could observe both symmetric proliferative fate outcomes, as well as asymmetric outcomes. This suggests the RGs in these human tissues can undergo both symmetric and asymmetric divisions.

## Formation of functional cerebral cortical neurons

The formation of the radially organized CP begins with the formation of its precursor, the preplate. To test for this initial organization, we stained 30-day organoids for Tbr1, a marker of the preplate, as well as Map2, a neuronal marker. This revealed the presence of a basal neural layer reminiscent of the preplate, and an apically adjacent region reminiscent of the IZ. Furthermore, we could observe Reelin positive neurons along the basal surface, suggesting the presence of Cajal-Retzius cells, an important population in generation of CP architecture.

The stereotypical layered structure of the mammalian CP is generated inside-out with laterborn neurons migrating through existing layers to populate more superficial layers. Although previous methods of deriving cortical neurons have been able to generate distinct layer identities, they have been unable to recapitulate this spatial separation. To test whether this organization could be recapitulated in cerebral organoids, we stained for cortical layer markers. In less developed tissues (30-day), early born Ctip2 neurons were located adjacent and internal to the Tbr1+ preplate, suggesting initiation of CP layer formation. Furthermore, neurons exhibited rudimentary separation into early-born deep layer (Ctip2+) and late-born superficial layer (Satb2+ and Brn2+), which became more distinct as tissues developed (75days). Finally, a cell-poor region reminiscent of the marginal zone was also evident. Importantly, although this modest spatial separation was an improvement upon other in vitro methods, organoids could not recapitulate the same degree of mature layer organization as in vivo, suggesting further cues are needed to generate the complex stereotypical layer II-VI organization.

In vivo, dorsal cortical neurons mature and extend long-range axons. To test for these characteristics, we performed GFP electroporation and examined neuronal morphology. GFP-labeled axon projections displayed complex branching and growth cone behavior and projected long-range axons in a manner reminiscent of axon bundling.

Finally, we tested whether neurons within cerebral organoids could exhibit neural activity by performing calcium dye imaging to detect Ca2+ oscillations, which revealed spontaneous calcium surges in individual cells. Furthermore, we applied exogenous glutamate and observed more frequent calcium spikes, indicating glutamatergic receptor activity. Finally, we performed action potential blockade by application of tetrodotoxin (TTX) and observed dampened calcium surges indicating calcium spikes were dependent upon neuronal activity.

## Recapitulation of human cerebral cortical organization

Human brain development exhibits unique progenitor zone organization. To test whether features of human brain development were recapitulated in cerebral organoids, we examined the distribution of Sox2+ progenitors and observed a population displaced from the apical surface consistent with an oRG identity. Furthermore, these fairly abundant oRGs appeared separated from the apical VZ by a Tuj1+ fiber layer reminiscent of the IFL. This organization suggests human cerebral organoids could recapitulate at least some aspects of human cortical development.

To rule out the possibility that this OSVZ-like organization was an in vitro artifact, we adapted the method to mouse ES cells to generate mouse cerebral organoids and examined whether a similar organization was present. We observed much smaller cortical tissues in mouse organoids compared with human, and only occasional oRGs that did not accumulate in an OSVZ-like region. These results suggest OSVZ and IFL-like layers are specific to human organoids.

We performed P-Vimentin staining to examine the morphology of human oRGs, which revealed basal processes but a lack of apical processes, a hallmark of oRGs. This suggests these basally displaced Sox2 and P-Vimentin positive progenitors indeed represent human oRGs. We also examined the division mode of oRGs and could identify daughter cell pairs in which only one daughter cell maintained Sox2 expression suggesting asymmetric division. Furthermore, we measured spindle orientation and found that the vast majority of oRGs divided vertically. This division mode is remarkably similar to the findings recently described by LaMonica et al. in human brain slice cultures suggesting recapitulation of human oRG behavior in cerebral organoids.

## Cerebral organoids model human microcephaly

Since disorders affecting human brain development have often proved difficult to recapitulate in animal models, we tested whether organoids could be used to model neurodevelopmental disorders. We identified a patient with severe microcephaly (-13.2 s.d. below mean for age and sex) and reduced stature (-6.7 s.d.), who, as determined through exome sequencing and confirmed by capillary sequencing, had compound heterozygous truncating mutations in CDK5RAP2. Skin fibroblasts from this patient revealed a loss of the CDK5RAP2 protein suggesting loss of function, consistent with previously reported CDK5RAP2 mutations in primary microcephaly patients.

We performed reprogramming of patient skin fibroblasts using lentiviral delivery of the four well-described reprogramming factors: Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4. We generated many independent clones of iPSCs and characterized four of these for morphology and pluripotency. All four lines exhibited similar doubling times and colony morphology that was indistinguishable from control iPSCs. All lines could form embryoid bodies and stained positive for the pluripotency marker alkaline phosphatase.

We performed cerebral organoid culture from all 4 lines and observed smaller EBs, which when transferred to neural induction failed to develop further. We hypothesized that since the patient also displayed reduced stature, perhaps overall EB growth was perturbed. Therefore, in order to allow the EBs to develop to a comparable size as control, we modified the protocol slightly by increasing the initial iPSC number. This modification allowed for the formation of neuroectoderm and subsequent neural tissue for analysis, which revealed smaller neuroepithelial tissues and a large degree of neuronal outgrowth compared with control tissues. Immunohistochemical staining for progenitors and neurons revealed smaller neural tissues with only very few progenitor regions. These overall smaller neural tissues were reminiscent of the reduced brain size seen in the patient.

These patient-derived cerebral organoids provided a unique opportunity to examine the cause of the hypoplasia seen in microcephaly. We therefore examined an earlier stage (22 days) and observed that, whereas control tissues displayed abundant, large neuroepithelial tissues composed of progenitors, patient-derived tissues displayed only occasional neuroepithelial regions. Furthermore, these tissues displayed decreased RGs and increased neurons compared with control suggesting premature neural differentiation. To test this possibility, we performed BrdU pulse-chase experiments revealing a dramatic increase in the number of BrdU+/DCX+ cells in patient organoids, consistent with premature neurogenic nonproliferative divisions.

We furthermore examined radial glial spindle orientation and observed that, whereas control tissues at this early stage (22 days) displayed exclusively horizontal orientations, patient organoids displayed many oblique and vertical oriented spindles. These results could explain the patient tissue phenotype since precise horizontal orientation of the spindle is necessary for early symmetric expansion of neural stem cells.

Finally, we tested whether the phenotype could be rescued by reintroducing CDK5RAP2 protein. We performed coelectroporation of GFP and CDK5RAP2 into day 12 patient organoids and examined 6 days later. Since high overexpression of CDK5RAP2 was toxic (data not shown), the cells with high GFP signal did not survive to this time point. However, we could observe regions in CDK5RAP2 electroporated tissues with larger neuroepithelium compared with tissues electroporated only with GFP. This effect could be due to surviving cells with a low-level of CDK5RAP2 re-expression. Supporting this interpretation, staining for GFP revealed many low-level GFP+ cells in CDK5RAP2 coelectroporated patient organoids with radial glial morphology (54%±2 SEM, n=74 cells from 3 tissues). In contrast, GFP+ cells in patient organoids electroporated with GFP alone exhibited mainly neuronal morphology with significantly fewer radial glia (19%±11 SEM, n=102 cells from 3 tissues, P<0.05, Student's t-test). Thus, we conclude that the phenotype is specific to loss of CDK5RAP2.

As a further independent approach, we performed RNAi knockdown of CDK5RAP2 by coelectroporating GFP with two independent shRNAs found to knockdown endogenous CDK5RAP2. Both shRNAs led to a striking loss of Sox2+ progenitors and an increase in DCX+ neurons reflecting a statistically significant increase in neuron production rather than progenitor maintenance. These findings support the conclusion that loss of CDK5RAP2 leads to premature neural differentiation at the expense of progenitors.

# Methods

## Plasmid constructs and materials

GFP plasmid used for co-electroporation with shRNA and for live imaging was pCAG-GFP (Addgene plasmid 11150). shRNAs targeting human CDK5RAP2 were cloned using pSuper shRNA expression strategy (OligoEngine). Targeting sequences were as follows: shRNA 1 AGGACGTGTTGCTTCAGAAAT, shRNA 2 AGAGTCAGCCTTCTGCTAAAG, shRNA 3 GTGGAAGATCTCCTAACTAAA, shRNA 4 ACTATGAGACTGCTCTATCAG. The CDK5RAP2 expression construct was generated using the Gateway system (Invitrogen) by PCR amplification of CDK5RAP2 from MGC human CDK5RAP2 cDNA (clone ID: 9052276) using the primers with AttB sites: Forward: GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCATGATGGACTTGGTGTTGGAAG A, Reverse: GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTCAGCTTTATTGGCTGAAAGTTCTTC TC. CDK5RAP2 was cloned into destination vector pcDNA3.1/nV5-DEST.

## Cerebral organoid culture conditions

Human H9 ES (WA09) were obtained from WiCell at passage 26 with verified normal karyotype and contamination-free. iPS cells were obtained from System Biosciences (SC101A-1) verified pluripotent and contamination free. All human PSC lines were regularly checked and confirmed negative for mycoplasma. PSCs were maintained on CF-1 gamma irradiated MEFs (Global Stem) according to WiCell protocols. On day 0 of organoid culture, ESCs or iPSCs less than passage 50 were dissociated from MEFs by dispase treatment and MEFs were removed by gravity separation of stem cell colonies from MEFs before trypsinization of stem cells to generate single cells. 4500 cells were then plated in each well of an ultra-low binding 96-well plate (Corning) in hES media with low bFGF (5fold reduced) and 50uM ROCK inhibitor (Calbiochem).

EBs were fed every other day for 6 days then transferred to low adhesion 24-well plates (Corning) in neural induction media containing DMEM/F12, 1:100 N2 supplement (Invitrogen), Glutamax (Invitrogen), MEM-NEAA, and 1ug/ml Heparin (Sigma). These began forming neuroepithelial tissues, which were fed every other day for 5 days. On Day 11 of the protocol, tissues were transferred to droplets of Matrigel (BD Biosciences) by pipetting into cold Matrigel on a sheet of Parafilm with small 3mm dimples. These droplets were allowed to gel at 37C and were subsequently removed from the Parafilm and grown in differentiation media containing a 1:1 mixture of DMEM/F12 and Neurobasal containing 1:200 N2 supplement (Invitrogen), 1:100 B27 supplement without vitamin A (Invitrogen), 3.5ul/L 2-mercaptoethanol, 1:4000 insulin (Sigma), 1:100 Glutamax (Invitrogen), 1:200 MEM-NEAA.

After 4 days of stationary growth, the tissue droplets were transferred to a spinning bioreactor containing differentiation media as above except B27 supplement with vitamin A (Invitrogen) was used. Since retinoic acid has been shown to be important for neuronal differentiation in vivo, we included it in the final media used to differentiate the cerebral organoids.

## Mouse organoid culture conditions

Mouse A9 ES cells were cultured on Mitomycin C growth inactivated MEFs and passaged according to standard protocols. For the generation of mouse organoids, the organoid protocol was applied with the following modifications: cells were trypsinized and 2000 stem cells were plated in each well of an ultra-low binding 96-well plate in differentiation medium as described by Eiraku et al. (Medium containing 10uM SB431542 but without Dkk-1). Subsequent steps were followed according to the human organoid method using identical media compositions, with the exception that for mouse tissues faster timing was used according to morphology. EBs were transferred to neural induction medium on day 4, embedded in matrigel droplets on day 6, and on day 9 transferred to the spinning bioreactor.

## Organoid electroporation

Electroporation was performed using a petri dish tissue electrode and electro-square-porator (ECM 830) both from BTX Harvard Apparatus. A total of 3ul of 2ug/ul total plasmid (GFP for live imaging, 1.8ug/ul shRNA + 0.2ug/ul GFP for shRNA experiments) was injected in 4-5 locations within the organoid and electroporation was performed in differentiation media without antibiotics at 5 pulses, 80V, 50 ms duration, 1 sec interval. For rescue experiments, GFP expression plasmid and the CDK5RAP2 construct were coelectroporated at equal concentrations (1ug/ul each).

## Live imaging in organoids

Live imaging was performed using a LSM780 confocal laser scanning system (Zeiss) equipped with temperature and CO2 control. For calcium imaging, Fluo-4 direct (Life Technologies) was prepared according to manufacturer and applied 60 min before the start of imaging. Imaging was performed at 494nm excitation and 516nm emission, frames taken every 20 sec for 100 frames. Data analysis of calcium imaging was performed using ImageJ (Fiji). Regions of interest (ROIs) were manually selected and mean fluorescence was calculated for each time frame. Change is fluorescence was calculated as follows: Δ F/F=(FFbasal ))/F background where F basal was the lowest mean fluorescence value across imaging while F background was the average mean fluorescence across all frames. Glutamate was added by bath application to media during imaging at a final concentration 100uM. TTX was added by bath application to media during imaging at a final concentration of 1uM and imaging was resumed after a 10min incubation time.

## Histology and immunofluorescence

Tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 20 min at 4C followed by washing in PBS 3 times 10 min. Tissues were allowed to sink in 30% sucrose overnight and then embedded in 10%/7.5% gelatin/sucrose and cryosectioning at 20 μ m. Tissue sections were stained with hemotoxylin/eosin or used for immunostaining. For immunohistochemistry, section were blocked and permeabilized in 0.25% Triton-X, 4% normal donkey serum in PBS. Sections were then incubated with primary antibodies in 0.1% Triton-X, 4% normal donkey serum at the following dilutions: N-Cadherin (mouse, BD Biosciences 610920, 1:500), Sox2 (rabbit, Chemicon, AB5603, 1:300), Tuj1 (mouse, Covance MMS-435P, 1:750), TUNEL (In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit-Fluorescein, Roche), FoxG1 (rabbit, Abcam ab18259, 1:200), Emx1 (rabbit, Sigma HPA006421, 1:50), Krox20 (rabbit, Covance PRB-236P, 1:100), Pax2 (mouse, Abnova H00005076-M01, 1:200), Lmo4 (goat, Santa Cruz sc-11122, 1:50), Tshz2 (rabbit, Sigma SAB4500379, 1:50), Otx1+2 (rabbit, Abcam ab21990, 1:200), Gbx2 (goat, Santa Cruz sc22230, 1:100), Auts2 (rabbit, Sigma HPA000390, 1:250), Nkx2.1 (rabbit, Epitomics 6594-1, 1:250), Pax6 (mouse monoclonal, DSHB, 1:200), Pax6 (rabbit, Covance PRB-278P, 1:300), Calretinin (mouse, Swant 6B3, 1:100), Nrp2 (goat, RandD systems AF2215, 1:40), Fzd9 (rabbit, Acris SP4153P, 1:200), Prox1 (mouse, Chemicon MAB5654, 1:200), TTR (sheep, AbD Serotec AHP1837, 1:100), Tbr2 (rabbit, Chemicon AB9618, 1:500), Tbr1 (rabbit, Abcam ab31940, 1:300), MAP2 (mouse, 1:300), PH3 (rabbit, Cell Signaling Technology 9706S, 1:300), P-Vimentin (mouse, MBL International D076-3S, 1:250), BrdU (preincubation in 2N HCl 20min 37C, rat, AbD Serotec OBT0030CX, 1:500), Baf53a (rabbit, Bethyl IHC-00287, 1:250), Baf53b (rabbit, Abcam ab140642, 1:250), Reelin, (mouse, Millipore MAB5366, 1:200), Ctip2 (rat, Abcam ab18465, 1:100), Satb2 (rabbit, Abcam ab34735, 1:100), DCX (goat, Santa Cruz sc-8066, 1:300), Brn2 (goat, Santa Cruz sc-6029, 1:40). Secondary andibodies used were donkey AlexaFluor 488, 568, and 647 conjugates (Invitrogen, 1:500). For sections stained for BrdU, sections were first incubated with 2N HCl at 37C for 20 min followed by washing three times in PBS before blocking.

## RT-PCR

Total mRNA samples were isolated from whole organoids or hES cells in triplicate using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). Potential contaminating DNA was removed using DNA-Free (Ambion) and 1ug RNA was used for cDNA synthesis using SuperScript III (Life Technologies). PCR conditions and number of cycles (25-35 cycles) for each primer pair were empirically determined using hES cDNA or human fetal brain cDNA (Invitrogen). Cycles were run at 94C denaturation for 30 sec, 58-62C annealing for 45 sec, depending on primer pair, and 72C extension for 30 sec. Primer pairs used were as follows: Oct4a For ggagaagctggagcaaaacc, Rev tggctgaataccttcccaaa; Nanog For gatttgtgggcctgaagaaa, Rev ctttgggactggtggaagaa; Sox1 For tatcttctgctccggctgtt, Rev gggtcttcccttcctcctc; Pax6 For agttcttcgcaacctggcta, Rev attctctccccctccttcct; Actb For aaatctggcaccacaccttc, Rev agaggcgtacagggatagca; BF1 For aggagggcgagaagaagaac, Rev tgaactcgtagatgccgttg; Six3 For ctatcaacaacccccaacca, Rev agccgtgcttgtcctagaaa; Krox20 For ttgaccagatgaacggagtg, Rev cttgcccatgtaagtgaaggt; Isl1 For gctttgttagggatgggaaa, Rev actcgatgtgatacaccttgga.

## Cell culture and western blot

HEK293T cells were grown in 10% FBS/DMEM and split at 40% into a 6-well dish (BD Falcon) followed by transfection the next day using TurboFect (Thermo Scientific) with 5ug plasmid DNA. Cells were lysed 2 days later and western blot was performed using rabbit anti-CDK5RAP2 (A300-554A, Bethyl labs, 1:10,000) followed by blotting for mouse antialpha tubulin (mouse, Sigma T6199, 1:10,000). Dermal fibroblasts were obtained by skin punch biopsy and were cultured in amnioMAX C-100 complete medium (Invitrogen) and maintained in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 and 3% O2. Cells were lysed in 50 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 280 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM EGTA, 10% Glycerol supplemented with protease inhibitor tablet (Roche). Protein samples were run on a 3-8 % Tris-acetate gel (Invitrogen) followed by immunoblotting using rabbit anti-CDK5RAP2 (A300-554A, Bethyl labs, 1:2,000) and mouse anti-vinculin (V9264, Sigma, 1:2,000). To perform immunofluorescence, patient fibroblasts were fixed in -20°C methanol for 7 min and then blocked in PBS/1 % bovine serum albumin. Cells were then incubated in rabbit anti-CDK5RAP2 (A300-554A, Bethyl labs, 1:2,000) and mouse anti-CPAP (SC-81432, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, 1:100) in blocking solution. Secondary antibodies used were donkey AlexaFluor 488 and 568 conjugates (Invitrogen, 1:500).

## Research subject and gene identification

Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of Patient 3842 and the patient's parents by standard methods. Informed consent was obtained from the family and the study approved by the Multi-centre Research Ethics Committee for Scotland (04:MRE00/19). Whole exome capture and sequencing was performed at the Welcome Trust Sanger Institute (WTSI), UK. DNA was sheared to 150bp lengths by sonification (Covaris, Woburn, Massachusetts, USA) prior to whole exome capture and amplification using the SureSelect Human All Exon 50Mb kit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). Fragments were sequenced using the Illumina Hiseq platform. 76bp paired end sequence reads were aligned to the UCSC genome browser hg19 reference sequence using BWA. Sequence variants were obtained using GenomeAnalysisTK and annotated with transcript and protein consequence, polyphen, condel and SIFT scores. Mutations were confirmed by bidirectional sequencing of PCR products using dye terminator chemistry on an ABI 3730 capillary sequencer (Applied Biosystems).

## Patient iPSC reprogramming

Patient skin fibroblasts were reprogrammed using lentiviral delivery of Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. Lentivirus production: A DNA mix consisting of virus packaging vectors (tat, rev, gag/pol, 1.5ug each, and vsv-g, 3ug) and the loxP flanked OKSM reprogramming vector (oct-4, klf4, sox2, c-myc, 30ug) were transfected into 293 cells. In brief, 112.5 μ l Fugene6 was added dropwise to 2ml DMEM under constant vortexing followed by a 10min incubation at RT. The DNA mix was added to the DMEM/Fugene6 mix while vortexing to generate the final transfection mix. After a 15min incubation at RT, the transfection mix was added onto 80% confluent 293 cells, cultured in 13ml 293 culture medium. Virus-containing medium was harvested and replaced with fresh medium 48h, 60h and 72h after transfection. The viral supernatant was stored at 4°C. Reprogramming of human dermal fibroblasts: 1× 10 5 dermal fibroblasts were seeded the day before infection onto 10cm and 6cm 0.1% Gelatin-coated culture dishes. Cells were incubated for 12h with viral supernatant 1:1 mixed with dermal fibroblast medium supplemented with 4 μ g/ml polybrene. Thereafter, cells were washed with 1x PBS and cultured for 2 more days in dermal fibroblast medium. After 2 days medium was switched to human iPSCs medium supplemented with 10ng/ml bFGF (peprotech, cat.nr: 100-18B), 10 μ M CHIR99021 (stemgent, cat.nr: 04-0004) and 1 μ M PD 0325901 (stemgent, cat.nr: 04-0006) and cells cultured for 21 days. Medium was changed every day. Outgrowing colonies, identified by morphological appearance, were picked and passaged on inactivated CF-1 MEFs (global stem, cat.nr: GSC-6201M). Patient derived iPS lines were compared to control iPS cells obtained from a healthy donor (System Biosciences, SC101A-1). Alkaline phosphatase staining was performed using Vector Blue Alkaline Phosphatase Substrate Kit (Vector Laboratories, SK5300).

# Discussion

We have established a novel approach to studying human neurodevelopmental processes through in vitro culture of cerebral organoids from human pluripotent stem cells. This method recapitulates not only fundamental mechanisms of mammalian neurodevelopment, but also displays characteristics of human brain development. We are hopeful that this method will allow the study of a variety of neurodevelopmental processes specific to human brain development.

Furthermore, a primary goal in neuroscience is to understand the roots of human neurological disease. We have modeled at least some aspects of microcephaly in these cerebral organoids. The finding that progenitor zones in patient-derived tissues display premature neural differentiation at the expense of early progenitors supports a model in which the founder population of RG progenitors fails to properly expand in patient tissues, thereby leading to an overall smaller brain. This may also explain why mouse models have been unable to recapitulate the severity of the disorder in humans. It is hypothesized that the mouse founder population of neural progenitors do not undergo expansion to the same extent as in human before the onset of neurogenesis. Thus, a disruption of the founder population in mice would not lead to as severe an effect as that seen in humans. Overall, our findings suggest we can utilize this in vitro culture system to model aspects of human neurodevelopment and neurological disease and hopefully provide novel insight into pathogenesis of these disorders.
