# Abstract

The immune system influences the fate of developing cancers by not only functioning as a tumour promoter that facilitates cellular transformation, promotes tumour growth and sculpts tumour cell immunogenicity, but also as an extrinsic tumour suppressor that either destroys developing tumours or restrains their expansion. Yet, clinically apparent cancers still arise in immunocompetent individuals in part as a consequence of cancer-induced immunosuppression. In many individuals, immunosuppression is mediated by cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated antigen-4 (CTLA-4) and programmed death-1 (PD-1), two immunomodulatory receptors expressed on T cells. Monoclonal-antibody-based therapies targeting CTLA-4 and/or PD-1 (checkpoint blockade) have yielded significant clinical benefits—including durable responses—to patients with different malignancies. However, little is known about the identity of the tumour antigens that function as the targets of T cells activated by checkpoint blockade immunotherapy and whether these antigens can be used to generate vaccines that are highly tumour-specific. Here we use genomics and bioinformatics approaches to identify tumour-specific mutant proteins as a major class of T-cell rejection antigens following anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4 therapy of mice bearing progressively growing sarcomas, and we show that therapeutic synthetic long-peptide vaccines incorporating these mutant epitopes induce tumour rejection comparably to checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. Although mutant tumour-antigen-specific T cells are present in progressively growing tumours, they are reactivated following treatment with anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4 and display some overlapping but mostly treatment-specific transcriptional profiles, rendering them capable of mediating tumour rejection. These results reveal that tumour-specific mutant antigens are not only important targets of checkpoint blockade therapy, but they can also be used to develop personalized cancer-specific vaccines and to probe the mechanisms of cancer immunotherapy.

# Introduction

In this study, we used two distinct progressor 3-methylcholanthrene-induced (MCA) sarcoma cell lines (d42m1-T3 and F244) and asked whether they expressed sufficient immunogenicity to be controlled by checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. Both sarcoma lines were rejected in wild-type mice treated therapeutically with anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4. Rejection was immunologic because (1) it was ablated by administration of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that either deplete CD4+ or CD8+ cells or neutralize interferon-γ (IFNγ); (2) it did not occur in Rag2-/- mice lacking T, B and natural killer T (NKT) cells or Batf3-/- mice lacking CD8α+ CD103+ dendritic cells required for tumour antigen cross-presentation to CD8+ T cells; and (3) it induced a memory response that protected mice against rechallenge with the same tumour cells that had been injected into naive mice.

On the basis of our previous success using genomics approaches to identify tumour-specific mutant antigens (TSMA) responsible for the spontaneous rejection of highly immunogenic, unedited MCA sarcomas, we asked whether a similar approach could identify antigens responsible for anti-PD-1-mediated rejection of d42m1-T3 progressor tumours. To increase the robustness and accuracy of our epitope predictions, we modified our method as follows: (1) mutation calls from complementary DNA capture sequencing were translated to corresponding protein sequences, pipelined through three major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I epitope-binding algorithms and a median binding affinity was calculated for each predicted epitope; (2) epitopes were prioritized on the basis of predicted median binding affinities; and (3) filters were applied to the prioritized epitope list to eliminate those predicted to be poorly processed by the immunoproteasome and to deprioritize those from hypothetical proteins or those that displayed lower binding affinity to class I than their corresponding wild-type sequences.

# Main

Using this approach, many epitopes were predicted for H-2Db and H-2Kb based on the 2,796 non-synonymous mutations expressed in d42m1-T3. Focusing on epitopes with the highest predicted binding affinity to H-2Db or H-2Kb, we narrowed the list down to four H-2Db-binding epitopes and 62 H-2Kb-binding epitopes. Applying the aforementioned filters eliminated two predicted strong-binding H-2Db epitopes and 20 predicted strong-binding H-2Kb epitopes. Based on the resulting in-silico-generated epitope landscape, two predominant H-2Kb-restricted mutant epitopes were identified by their predicted binding affinities: an A506T mutation in the Lama4 gene and a mutation in the Alg8 gene.

To identify which of the predicted d42m1-T3 neoepitopes functioned as targets for CD8+ T cells in anti-PD-1-treated, tumour-bearing mice, freshly explanted CD8+ tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) were isolated just before tumour rejection (day 11) and stained with fluorescently labelled H-2Kb or H-2Db tetramers loaded with their corresponding strong-binding 66 predicted mutant epitopes. The only tetramer-positive T cells consistently identified in the CD8+ TIL population were those reacting with mLama4-H-2Kb tetramers or mAlg8-H-2Kb tetramers. Similar results were obtained when freshly explanted CD8+ TIL from the same mice were co-cultured with naive irradiated splenocytes pulsed with each of the 66 predicted H-2Kb and H-2Db epitopes. The mLama4 and mAlg8 epitopes were, again, the only significant hits, inducing IFNγ and tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) production. These results demonstrate that d42m1-T3 expresses two dominant TSMA epitopes for CD8+ T cells following anti-PD-1 immunotherapy.

To independently validate these observations, we established CD8+ T cell lines from spleens of mice that had rejected d42m1-T3 tumours after anti-PD-1 treatment. These T cells produced IFNγ when co-cultured with d42m1-T3 but not when co-cultured with F244 or other independent sarcoma lines. Stimulation was restricted by H-2Kb but not by H-2Db. The only predicted epitopes that stimulated these T cell lines were mLama4 and mAlg8, but not their wild-type forms.

Four subsequent findings supported the conclusion that mLama4 and mAlg8 were the relevant antigens responsible for anti-PD-1-induced rejection of d42m1-T3. First, mLama4 or mAlg8 epitopes stabilized H-2Kb expression on RMA-S cells, which lack a functional antigen transporter and thus fail to stably express MHC class I proteins on the cell surface. Second, both epitopes were detected by mass spectrometry in eluates of affinity-purified H-2Kb isolated from d42m1-T3 tumours. Using a discovery mass spectrometry approach, we identified mLama4 in the H-2Kb eluate and verified its identity using an isotope-labelled synthetic mLama4 peptide. We also found more than 200 wild-type peptides associated with H-2Kb, but we have no evidence that any of these function as d42m1-T3 antigens. In contrast, using the more sensitive targeted selected reaction monitoring (SRM) mass spectrometry method, both mLama4 and mAlg8 peptides were identified in the H-2Kb eluate. Notably, mLama4 and mAlg8 were the only predicted strong-binding mutant epitopes found. Peptides from wild-type Lama4 or wild-type Alg8 were not detected. Neither mLama4 nor mAlg8 were detected in H-2Kb eluates from F244 cells. Third, as detected by staining with H-2Kb-mLama4 or -mAlg8 tetramers, CD8+ T cells specific for either antigen accumulated temporally in d42m1-T3 tumours of anti-PD-1-treated mice, reaching maximal values just before tumour rejection. No mLama4- or mAlg8-tetramer-positive TIL were observed in F244 sarcomas from anti-PD-1-treated mice. Fourth, the two H-2Kb-restricted epitopes induced antigen-specific CD8+ T cell responses in naive mice when injected together with polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) as assessed by ELISPOT.

Since mLama4- and mAlg8-specific T cells were linked to anti-PD-1-induced d42m1-T3 rejection, we asked whether a therapeutic vaccine comprised of these antigens could protect against tumour outgrowth. When 10-member groups of mice bearing established d42m1-T3 tumours were vaccinated with the combination of mLama4 (28-mer) and mAlg8 (21-mer) synthetic long peptides (SLPs) with poly(I:C), 9 rejected their tumours compared to control mice vaccinated with irrelevant human papilloma virus (HPV) (30-mer) SLP plus poly(I:C) or poly(I:C) alone. In multiple experiments, mice vaccinated with mLama4 + mAlg8 SLP + poly(I:C) displayed an 85% survival whereas those treated with HPV SLP + poly(I:C) or poly(I:C) alone showed 10% and 15% survival, respectively. Prophylactic administration of the combined mLama4 and mAlg8 SLP vaccine induced 88% survival. The combined mLama4 and mAlg8 prophylactic SLP vaccine induced superior protection compared to either SLP alone or compared to vaccines comprised of the minimal 8 amino acid epitopes. The d42m1-T3-specific vaccines did not prevent outgrowth of unrelated F244 sarcomas. These results not only demonstrate that mLama4 and mAlg8 are major antigenic targets that mediate checkpoint blockade-induced rejection of d42m1-T3 tumours, but also show that anti-PD-1 or therapeutic SLP vaccines consisting of the TSMA targeted by anti-PD-1 are similarly efficacious.

Since the aforementioned analyses were conducted using anti-PD-1-treated mice bearing d42m1-T3 tumours, we asked whether the presence of mLama4- and mAlg8-specific T cells in the TIL population was dependent on checkpoint blockade therapy. T cells specific for mLama4 or mAlg8 were detected in mice treated with control mAb or anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4. The percentage and total number of mLama4- or mAlg8-specific CD8+ TIL were similar in tumours from control mAb- and anti-PD-1-treated mice but were elevated in mice treated with either anti-CTLA-4 or anti-CTLA-4 + anti-PD-1.

The observation that mLama4- and mAlg8-specific T cells were found in tumours from mice treated with either control mAb or checkpoint blockade mAbs prompted us to assess the resultant changes in the TIL population following anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4 treatment. We used RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to assess gene expression in freshly isolated, mLama4-H-2Kb-tetramer+ TIL from groups of tumour-bearing mice treated with control mAb, anti-PD-1, anti-CTLA-4 or anti-PD-1 + anti-CTLA-4. Since mLama4-specific T cells were seven times more abundant in d42m1-T3 tumours than mAlg8-specific T cells in this series of experiments, we restricted our analysis to the former. Only a subset of 25 genes was commonly regulated (either up or down) by treatment with anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4. This group included a subset of genes whose enhanced expression is similar to that observed in CD8+ T cells from mice during acute secondary viral infection and depressed in a manner similar to that of exhausted CD8+ T cells in chronic viral infection. In contrast, antigen-specific CD8+ TIL isolated from anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4 treated mice displayed mostly treatment-specific alterations of non-overlapping sets of genes involved in CD8+ T cell effector functions. The effects of checkpoint blockade on gene expression were predominantly observed on TSMA-specific T-cells and not in other CD8+ TIL.

To determine which pathways were regulated by the different checkpoint blockade therapies, we performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) using canonical-pathway- and immunological-signature-databases. When compared to mLama4-specific TIL from control mAb-treated mice, tumour-antigen-specific TIL from mice treated with anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4 displayed a common set of alterations involving effector function, MAPK, chemokine and cytokine receptor signalling. In contrast, mLama4-specific TIL from mice treated with anti-PD-1, anti-CTLA-4 or both mAbs displayed profound treatment-specific pathway alterations. Treatment with anti-PD-1 produced metabolic changes including those involving oxidative phosphorylation, glycolysis, respiratory electron transport, tricarboxylic acid cycle and pentose phosphate pathways, as well as in pathways involved in IL-2 signalling. These cells also displayed a profile consistent with response to type I IFN. Treatment with anti-CTLA-4 increased NFAT and JAK-STAT signalling pathway activity, cellular proliferation/cell cycle, and activation of effector T cells. Treatment with both anti-CTLA-4 and anti-PD-1 induced a synergistic pattern of metabolic and effector T-cell-specific functions, including those involving T-cell-mediated anti-tumour activity. This was reflected in the most significant enhancement of effector molecules such as IFNγ, Granzyme A, Granzyme B, and Fas ligand. Thus, whereas blockade of different inhibitory co-stimulators leads to a common biological outcome—tumour eradication—the precise mechanisms by which this outcome is achieved differ.

We also assessed changes in expression of functionally relevant proteins on/in CD8+ TIL in mice undergoing treatment with different checkpoint-blocking mAbs. TIL specific for mLama4 or mAlg8 from mice treated with anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4 displayed lower cell surface expression of lymphocyte-activation gene 3 (LAG-3) and T cell immunoglobulin and mucin protein 3 (TIM-3) than those in progressively growing tumours in control mAb-treated mice. Elevated LAG-3 and TIM-3 expression is known to mark antigen-experienced, dysfunctional (that is, exhausted) CD8+ T cells in chronic viral infection. Conversely, TIL specific for mLama4 or mAlg8 from anti-CTLA-4- or anti-CTLA-4 + anti-PD-1-treated mice displayed significantly higher levels of Granzyme B than antigen-specific TIL from mice treated with either anti-PD-1 alone or control mAb. Consistent with the RNA-Seq analysis, these changes were observed predominantly in antigen-specific TIL. In addition, whereas a low percentage of CD8+ TIL from mice treated with control mAb produced IFNγ and TNFα, the percentage of IFNγ-producing TIL increased following treatment of the mice with anti-PD-1 and particularly with anti-CTLA-4 or the combination of anti-CTLA-4 + anti-PD-1. TIL expressing both cytokines, which are likely to represent the most potent anti-tumour effectors, were most highly represented following treatment of tumour-bearing mice with the combination of anti-CTLA-4 + anti-PD-1.

# Discussion

This report documents that TSMA are targets of checkpoint blockade immunotherapy and can be used in vaccines that therapeutically induce tumour rejection as effectively as checkpoint blockade therapy. The ability to rapidly and accurately identify TSMA using genomics and bioinformatics approaches and use them to generate MHC tetramers to identify tumour-specific T cells provides a significant advantage to the fields of tumour immunology and cancer immunotherapy. This approach has not only facilitated the identification of the antigenic targets of T cells affected by checkpoint blockade therapy but also has provided insights into the molecular changes that occur within the tumour-antigen-specific T-cell population that give rise to the anti-tumour effects of anti-PD-1 and/or anti-CTLA-4. Our findings provide some of the first experimental support for the clinical observations that (1) checkpoint blockade therapy amplifies, in some cases, pre-existing anti-tumour T-cell responses; (2) whereas anti-CTLA-4 treatment eliminates regulatory T cells, promotes T-cell priming, and renders the host more susceptible to autoimmunity, anti-PD-1 promotes T-cell activation acting as a rheostat of immune effector function; and (3) dual blockade of CTLA-4 and PD-1 is particularly effective in promoting enhanced anti-tumour effector functions.

The mutational loads of the MCA sarcomas used in this study are high and similar to those of ultraviolet- and carcinogen-induced human cancers. For these types of tumours, it is likely that TSMA vaccines targeting multiple antigens will be possible, thereby providing better coverage of the tumour cell population in part due to dealing more effectively with tumour heterogeneity. Additionally, the combination of a TSMA vaccine and checkpoint blockade may facilitate the immune system's ability to recognize less immunogenic TSMA as well as shared, tumour-associated antigens (TAA) via mechanisms that mimic epitope spreading. However, recent studies have shown that human tumours containing far fewer mutations (for example, 26 mutations) can be sensitive to TSMA-based immunotherapy even for tumour-specific antigens that are targets for class II restricted CD4+ T cells. Our study thus provides a strong argument to actively pursue the use of TSMA as targets for cancer immunotherapy, as a means to identify patients who would best benefit from such therapy, and as components of MHC tetramers that can be used to identify tumour-specific T cells as biomarkers of successful anti-tumour responses.

# Methods

Mice. Wildtype and Rag2-/- mice were purchased from Taconic Farms. Batf3-/- mice on a 129S6 background were provided by K. M. Murphy and were bred in our specific-pathogen free animal facility. All in vivo experiments used 8-12-week-old male, 129S6 background mice (to match the sex and strain of the tumours) housed in our specific-pathogen free animal facility. All studies were performed in accordance with procedures approved by the AAALAC accredited Animal Studies Committee of Washington University in St Louis.

Tumour transplantation. MCA-induced sarcomas used in this study were generated in male 129S6 strain wild-type or Rag2-/- mice and were banked as low-passage tumour cells as previously described. All cell lines used in this study were tested for mycoplasma. Tumour cells derived from frozen stocks and propagated in vitro in RPMI media (Hyclone) supplemented with 10% FCS (Hyclone) were washed extensively, resuspended at a density of 6.67 x 10^6 cells/ml in endotoxin-free PBS and then 150 µl were injected subcutaneously into the flanks of recipient mice. Tumour cells were > 90% viable at the time of injection as assessed by trypan blue exclusion. Tumour growth was quantified by calliper measurements and expressed as the average of two perpendicular diameters. Tumour growth measurements were performed blinded. Sample size was chosen based on extensive previous work with this animal model. No randomization was used. For antibody depletion studies, 250 µg of control mAb (PIP), anti-CD4 (GK1.5) or anti-CD8α (YTS169.4) was injected intraperitoneally into mice at day -1 and every 7 days thereafter.

MHC class I epitope prediction. All missense mutations for d42m1-T3 were analysed for the potential to form MHC class I epitopes that bind to either H-2Db or H-2Kb molecules. The Stabilized Matrix Method (SMM) algorithm, the Artificial Neural Network (ANN) algorithm, and the NetMHCpan algorithm provided by the Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource was used to predict epitope processing and binding affinities and the results were ultimately expressed as affinity values (1/IC50 x 100; where IC50 is the half-maximum inhibitory concentration). The median affinity value was calculated by taking the median of the predicted affinity values from SMM, ANN, and NetMHCpan algorithms. For the prediction of epitope processing, the NetChop algorithm available from the Immune Epitope Database was used and potential epitopes were filtered with those with a NetChop score of 0.6 or higher being prioritized. Filters were also applied to eliminate mutations occurring in hypothetical Riken proteins and to de-prioritize mutations resulting in affinity values that were less than that predicted for the wild-type sequence.

Antibodies. Anti-H-2Kb (B8-24-3) and anti-H-2Db (B22/249) antibodies were provided by T. H. Hansen (Washington University School of Medicine). Anti-PD-1 (rat chimaeric murine IgG1 clone 4H2) and anti-CTLA-4 (murine IgG2b clone 9D9) antibodies were provided by A. J. Korman (Bristol-Myers Squibb). Isotype control antibodies (mouse IgG2a OKT3 and mouse IgG1 GIR-208) were purchased from Bio X Cell and Leinco Technologies, respectively. Anti-CD4 (GK1.5), anti-CD8α (YTS169.4), anti-IFNγ (H22) monoclonal antibodies and control immunoglobulin (PIP, a monoclonal antibody specific for bacterial glutathione S-transferase) were produced from hybridoma supernatants and purified in endotoxin-free form by Protein G affinity chromatography (Leinco Technologies). Fluorescently conjugated antibodies against CD3ε, CD4, CD8, CD45, LAG-3, TIM-3, PD-1, IFNγ, and TNFα were purchased from BioLegend. For tetramer staining, an antibody to CD8 was purchased from Accurate Chemical (clone CT-CD8α) as recommended for use with tetramer staining by the NIH Tetramer Core Facility at Emory. Fc block (anti-CD16/32) was purchased from BD Bioscience.

Peptides. All 8-, 9-, and 10-mer peptides were purchased from Peptide 2.0. All peptides were HPLC-purified to > 95% purity. Peptides for vaccine experiments were synthesized at ISA Therapeutics B.V. The peptides were synthesized using solid phase Fmoc/tBu chemistry on a PTI Prelude peptide synthesizer and purified on a Gilson preparative HPLC system to > 95% purity. The identity and purity of the peptides for vaccine experiments were confirmed with UPLC-mass spectrometry on a Waters Acquity UPLC/TQD system.

Checkpoint blockade immunotherapy. Tumour cells were subcutaneously transplanted into mice at 1 x 10^6 cells in 150 µl into the flank. Mice were treated intraperitoneally with 200 µg anti-PD-1 or anti-CTLA-4, used alone or in combination on days 3, 6, and 9 post-tumour transplant. For controls, mice were injected with 200 µg each of IgG2a and IgG1 isotype control antibodies.

Generation of CTL lines. To generate the d42m1-T3-specific CTL lines, wild-type mice were injected with 1 x 10^6 d42m1-T3 tumour cells and treated with anti-PD-1 that induced tumour rejection. Alternatively, wild-type mice were injected with 1 x 10^6 d42m1-T3 tumour cells and were not treated with anti-PD-1, leading to formation of progressively growing tumours that were then surgically resected. Fifty days later, these mice were subsequently rechallenged with 1 x 10^6 d42m1-T3 tumour cells, which were then rejected. In the case of either protocol, spleens from independent mice that rejected the tumour were harvested two weeks after rejection and CTL lines were established by stimulating 40 x 10^6 splenocytes with 2 x 10^6 d42m1-T3 tumour cells pre-treated for 48 h with 100 U/ml of recombinant murine IFNγ and then irradiated (100 Gy). Cultures were stimulated two more times with irradiated, IFNγ stimulated tumour cells plus irradiated splenocytes and then CD8+ T cells were purified using magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec).

Peptide binding assay. The peptide-MHC class I binding assay with RMA-S cells was performed by incubating RMA-S cells with serial dilutions of peptides for 24 h. Cells were stained with mAbs against H-2Kb and H-2Db followed by secondary PE-conjugated goat anti-mouse Ig (BD Biosciences) and analysed by flow cytometry.

Tetramers. For determining kinetics of mLama4- or mAlg8-specific T-cell infiltration into tumours, H-2Kb tetramers conjugated to phycoerythrin (PE) were prepared with mutant Lama4 or Alg8 peptides and produced by the NIH Tetramer Core Facility (Emory University). For screening H-2Kb or H-2Db predicted epitopes, we generated peptide-MHC Class I complexes in house. The peptide-MHC class I complexes refolded with an ultraviolet-cleavable conditional ligand were prepared as described with modifications. Briefly, recombinant H-2Kb and H-2Db heavy chains and human β2-microglobulin light chain were produced in Escherichia coli, isolated as inclusion bodies, and dissolved in 4 M urea, 20 mM Tris pH 8.0. MHC Class I refolding reactions were performed by dialyzing a molar ratio of heavy chain:light chain:peptide of 1:1:8 against 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.4 for 48h. The ultraviolet-cleavable peptide SIINFEJL used to refold H-2Kb was purchased from Peptide 2.0. Refolded peptide-MHC class I complexes were captured by ion exchange, biotinylated, and purified by gel filtration FPLC. Ultraviolet-induced ligand exchange and combinatorial encoding of MHC Class I multimers was performed as described, except that the peptide-MHC multimers used for flow cytometry staining were prepared by the addition of titrated amounts of streptavidin-fluorochrome.

Measurement of IFNγ production. To generate target cells, tumour cells were treated with 100 U/ml IFNγ for 48 h and irradiated with 100 Gy before use. CTL cells (20,000 cells) were co-cultured with tumour target cells (20,000 cells) in 96-well round-bottomed plates for 48 h in a total volume of 200 µl. For peptide stimulation of CTL lines, 100,000 naive irradiated (30 Gy) splenocytes were pulsed with various 8- or 9-mer peptides at 37 °C for 1 h. Splenocytes were washed and 20,000 CTLs were added and the culture was incubated for 48 h. IFNγ in supernatants was quantified using an IFNγ ELISA kit (eBioscience). For blocking assays, 25 µg/ml of anti-H-2Kb (B8-24-3) or anti-H-2Db (B22/249) were added to the target cells (tumours) for 1 h before addition of CTL cells. For IFNγ ELISPOT, pre-coated 96-well PVDF filtration plates (Millipore) were washed with PBS and conditioned with medium containing 10% FCS. Erythrocyte-free single-cell suspensions from the spleen were added in triplicate and incubated for 20 h with 1 µM mutant or wild-type peptide. After extensive washes, 1 µg/ml biotinylated detection antibody was added. Streptavidin-alkaline phosphatase and 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/nitro blue tetrazolium (BCIP/NBT) (Moss Substrates) were subsequently used for colour development. Plates were scanned and analysed on an ImmunoSpot reader (C.T.L.). Reagents for ELISPOT were purchased from Mabtech.

Tumour and spleen harvest. Established tumours were excised from mice, minced and treated with 1 mg/ml type IA collagenase (Sigma) in HBSS (Hyclone) for 1 h at 37 °C. Spleens were also harvested, crushed and vigorously resuspended to make single-cell suspensions. To remove aggregates and clumps, cells were filtered through a 40 µm strainer.

CD8+ TIL peptide restimulation. Cells from tumours were enriched for CD8+ cells using Miltenyi mouse CD8+ enrichment kit by following manufacturer's protocol. Splenocytes harvested from naive mice were labelled with CFSE and irradiated at 30 Gy. 100,000 labelled irradiated splenocytes were then pulsed with 1 µM of peptide and 100,000 CD8+ TIL were subsequently added and incubated at 37 °C. After 1 h, BD GolgiPlug (BD Bioscience) was added and cells were incubated for an additional 4 h. Surface staining was performed and cells were then fixed and permeabilized with BD Cytofix/Cytoperm kit. Cells were then stained for IFNγ and TNFα.

Isolation of H-2Kb presented peptides. For H-2Kb isolation, sarcoma cell lines d42m1-T3 and F244 were each expanded to 5 x 10^8 cells. Prior to harvesting, cells were stimulated with 300 U/ml IFNγ for 48 h to increase MHC expression. Detachment of cells was facilitated by incubation with 100 U/ml Collagenase IV (Gibco) in PBS for 10 min at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. Cells were washed twice with PBS and cell pellets were subsequently snap frozen. MHC class I molecules were isolated as previously described. In brief, cell pellets were taken up in 1 ml of lysis buffer (1.2% CHAPS, 1 x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) in PBS) and homogenized by sonication. Lysates were cleared from remaining cell debris by centrifugation (2,500 g, 30 min) and passing through a 0.2 µm filter. MHC class I molecules were isolated by immunoaffinity purification using H-2Kb-specific antibody Y3 covalently coupled to cyanogen bromide-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare). MHC molecules were eluted with 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and released peptides were further isolated by ultrafiltration through centricons with a 10-kDa cut-off membrane. Prior to LC-mass spectrometry analysis peptides were desalted using C18 Zip Tips according to manufacturer's instructions and volumes were adjusted by vacuum centrifugation.

Identification of H-2Kb peptides by discovery mass spectrometry. For the discovery mass spectrometry, mass spectrometry analysis was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectron spray ion source coupled to a reverse-phase liquid chromatography UHPLC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano). Samples were injected onto a 75 µm x 2 cm trapping column at a flow rate of 4 µl/min for 5.75 min. Peptides were then separated on a 50 µm x 50 cm separation column at 50 °C in a column oven with a flow rate of 175 nl/min and a gradient ranging from 2.5 to 32% acetonitrile over 140 min. Data dependent acquisition was enabled using a top five method (the five most abundant ions with charges of 2+ or 3+ were selected for fragmentation during each scan cycle). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 and a mass range of 350-600 m/z. Peptides were fragmented and analysed in the ion trap using collision-induced dissociation (CID, normalized collision energy 35%, activation time 30 ms, isolation width, 2 m/z). Doubly charged masses for mLama4 and mAlg8 were prioritized for fragmentation using an inclusion list. Data processing was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 and Mascot search engine. Search restrictions were 5 p.p.m. precursor mass tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment mass tolerance with no enzymatic cleavage specificity selected. Percolator algorithm was used to evaluate false discovery rate with a target value of 0.05 (5% FDR). Additional post processing filters were an ion score >= 20, search engine rank 1 and peptide length between 8 and 12 amino acids.

Identification of H-2Kb peptides by targeted SRM. To generate the SRM assay library, the synthetic peptides were first analysed on an AB Sciex QTRAP 5500 mass spectrometer in SRM-triggered MS2 mode. 51 of the 62 strong binding H-2Kb peptides were selected for analysis because they had physiochemical properties that would allow their detection by mass spectrometry if present. Chromatographic separations of peptides were performed by a nanoLC ultra 2Dplus system (Eksigent) coupled to a 15 cm fused silica emitter, 75 µm inner diameter, packed with a Magic C18 AQ 5 µm resin. Peptides were loaded on the column from a cooled (4 °C) nanoLC-AS2 autosampler (Eksigent) and separated in 60 min by a linear gradient of acetonitrile (5-35%) and water, containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in SRM mode, triggering acquisition of a full fragment ion spectrum upon detection of an SRM trace. SRM acquisition was performed with Q1 and Q3 operated at unit resolution with a dwell time of 20 ms for each transition. For each peptide the first fragment ion of the y-series with an m/z above the m/z precursor + 20 Thomson (Th), for the doubly charged peptide precursors, were used as triggering transitions. Tandem mass spectrometry spectra were acquired in enhanced production mode, using quadrupole (q2) fragmentation, low Q1 resolution, scan speed 10,000 Da/s, and an m/z range of 250-1,000. Collision energies (CEs) were calculated according to the formulas: CE = 0.044 x m/z precursor + 5.5 for doubly charged precursor ions. Raw data files (wiff) were converted into mzXML format using msConvert from ProteoWizard. Qtrap MS2 spectra were assigned to peptide sequences using the SEQUEST algorithm and PeptideProphet. Skyline was used for building the SRM assay library and for SRM data analysis. SRM assays were further validated by measuring corresponding heavy isotope labelled peptides in a separate SRM run.

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis. For flow cytometry, cells were stained for 5 min at room temperature with 500 ng of Fc block (anti-CD16/32) and then stained with 200 ng of antibodies to CD45, CD4 or CD8α in 100 µl of staining buffer (PBS with 2% FCS and 0.05% NaN3) for 20 min at 4 °C. Propidium iodide (PI) was added at 1 µg/ml immediately before FACS analysis. For tetramer staining, cells were stained for 5 min at room temperature with 500 ng of Fc block (anti-CD16/32). Cells were then stained with anti-CD8 antibody for 20 min at 4 °C at a 1:100 dilution. Antibodies to CD45 and CD3ε along with H-2Kb tetramers conjugated to PE were then added at a concentration of 1:100 for 30 min at 4 °C. For intracellular cytokine staining of tumour-infiltrating lymphocytes, cells were isolated incubated for 5 h with GolgiPlug. Cells were then harvested, washed, stained with anti-CD3ε and CD8α for 15 min, and then fixed and permeabilized with BD fixation and permeabilization kit. Cells with then stained with anti-IFNγ or anti-TNFα. For sorting of mLama4-specific cells, tumour-infiltrating cells were enriched for CD45+ cells using CD45 cell purification magnetic beads. CD45-enriched cells were then sorted gating for PI- CD3ε+ CD8α+ mLama4-tetramer-PE+ or PI- CD3ε+ CD8α+ mLama4-tetramer-PE- cells. Sorting was performed on a BD FACSAria II. Sorted cells were pelleted and processed for RNA analysis. The purity of the sorted cells for input RNA was greater than 90% as assessed during post-sort cellular analysis. All flow cytometry was performed on the FACSCalibur or LSR Fortessa and analysed using FlowJo software.

Vaccination. Mice were vaccinated subcutaneously with 50 µg peptides corresponding to mLama4 or mAlg8 in combination with 100 µg poly(I:C). For SLP, the mLama4 peptide sequence used was QKISFFDGFEVGFNFRTLQPN GLLFYYT and the mAlg8 peptide sequence used was AVGI TYTWTRLYASVLTGSLV. Two weeks later spleens were harvested and splenocytes were restimulated with wild-type or mutant Lama4 or Alg8 8-mer peptides. Cells were then collected for ELISPOT analysis. For prophylactic vaccination, mice were subcutaneously injected with 50 µg of peptides corresponding to mLama4 or mAlg8, used alone or in combination, along with 100 µg of poly(I:C) in a total volume of 200 µl diluted in HBSS on day -10, -3, and +4 post-tumour transplant. d42m1-T3 tumour cells were transplanted at 1 x 10^6 tumour cells on day 0. As controls, mice were immunized with either HBSS alone, poly(I:C) alone or a long-peptide vaccine corresponding to human papilloma virus (HPV) with poly(I:C). Therapeutic vaccination experiments were performed in identical manner except vaccines were administered on day +3, +9, and +15 post-tumour transplant. Lack of survival was defined as mouse death or tumour size of 20 mm.

RNA sequencing. mRNA was extracted from cell lysates using oligo-dT beads. For cDNA synthesis, we used custom oligo-dT primers with a barcode and adaptor-linker sequence. After first strand synthesis, samples were pooled together based on Actb qPCR values and RNA-DNA hybrids were degraded using consecutive acid-alkali treatment. Then, a second sequencing linker was ligated using T4 ligase followed by SPRI cleanup. The mixture then was enriched by 16 cycles of PCR and SPRI purified to yield final strand specific RNA-seq libraries. The libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 2500 instrument using 50 bp x 25bp pair-end sequencing. Second read-mate was used for sample demultiplexing, at which point individual single-end fastqs files were aligned to mm9 genome using STAR aligner. Gene expression was quantitated using ht-seq and differentially expressed genes were defined using DESeq2R package at P value < 0.01. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) using canonical pathway- and immunological signature-databases was performed as previously described.

Statistical analysis. Samples were compared using an unpaired, two-tailed Student's t-test, unless specified.
