# Comparative Landscape of Genetic Dependencies in Human and Chimpanzee Stem Cells

# Abstract
Comparative studies of great apes provide a window into our evolutionary past, but the extent and identity of cellular differences that emerged during hominin evolution remain largely unexplored. We established a comparative loss-of-function approach to evaluate whether changes in human cells altered requirements for essential genes. By performing genome-wide CRISPR interference screens in human and chimpanzee pluripotent stem cells, we identified 75 genes with species-specific effects on cellular proliferation. These genes comprised coherent processes, including cell cycle progression and lysosomal signaling, which we determined to be human-derived by comparison with orangutan cells. Human-specific robustness to CDK2 and CCNE1 depletion persisted in neural progenitor cells and cerebral organoids, supporting the G1-phase length hypothesis as a potential evolutionary mechanism in human brain expansion. Our findings demonstrate that evolutionary changes in human cells reshaped the landscape of essential genes and establish a platform for systematically uncovering latent cellular and molecular differences between species.

# Introduction
Comparative studies of humans and chimpanzees, our closest extant relatives, have long sought to define the evolutionary origins of unique human features. Within seven million years, humans evolved numerous specializations, from bipedalism to the threefold expansion of the cerebral cortex. Many of these novel human traits emerge from changes in cell behavior during development. These changes in cell behavior may in turn reflect underlying differences in molecular circuits that emerged during the short time scale of hominin evolution. However, we currently lack a framework for systematically identifying which molecular pathways play divergent roles in conserved developmental cell types.

Current approaches for studying the molecular basis of human evolution include reconstructing candidate mutations at specific loci in model organisms, but only a handful of mutations in non-coding regulatory regions and coding genes have been examined in detail. Among conserved non-coding elements with unexpected changes in the human lineage, specific loci have been linked to gene expression changes in distal limbs, increased sweat gland number, and increased neural proliferation. Among coding changes, two human-specific coding mutations in FOXP2 have been proposed to contribute to human language capabilities based on functional studies in mouse models and human genetics, and three modern human-specific mutations in KIF18A and KNL1 prolong metaphase and reduce segregation errors in neural progenitor cells. In addition, recent duplications and subsequent modifications of ARHGAP11B and NOTCH2NL have been implicated in the expansion of the human cortex, supporting predictions that human-specific mutations may influence proliferation of neural progenitor cells during development. Nonetheless, connecting individual candidate mutations to evolved human traits remains challenging because most mutations are neutral or low effect size, analyses are low throughput, and we lack a detailed understanding of the divergence in cellular and developmental phenotypes that ultimately give rise to species differences.

In parallel, high-throughput genomics-based approaches have described gene regulatory changes that may contribute to species differences. Because ape primary tissue is largely inaccessible during early development, recent studies have employed stem cell derived models as an experimentally tractable system for comparative analyses of species differences during development. Thousands of cell type-specific gene expression differences have been identified in pluripotent stem cells, cardiomyocytes, endoderm, neural crest, and cortical neurons. However, these gene expression differences comprise a mixture of neutral changes, causal changes, and indirect downstream consequences, and genes that mediate species differences may have conserved expression. Therefore, it can be difficult to ascertain which molecular changes, among hundreds or thousands, drive differences in cellular physiology.

The history of developmental genetics provides a template for linking the function of individual genes to organismal phenotypes. Early mutagenesis screens in Drosophila melanogaster identified genes critical for body axis patterning. Many of these genes belonged to highly conserved cell signaling pathways that also coordinate development in vertebrates, such as Wnt, Hedgehog, and BMP. More recent efforts in organismal screening involve several international consortia that have generated large collections of knockout mice to investigate more complex vertebrate phenotypes. The success of these genetic approaches has resulted in the functional annotation of many of the genes that guide mammalian development. However, despite the conservation of many core developmental principles from fruit flies to mice to humans, these shared molecular functions do not account for how our species evolved to be different.

To apply functional genomics approaches to questions of species divergence, we harnessed recent advances in CRISPR-based technologies that have enabled genome-scale perturbation screens across thousands of human cell lines. These efforts have mapped landscapes of genetic dependencies with an enrichment of essential genes in coherent pathways that typically cluster by cell type of origin. Extending this approach to studies of comparative evolution could reveal genes or cellular processes with divergent functional roles in homologous cell types. Illuminating the extent and identity of recently evolved genetic dependencies would complement individual candidate gene approaches, descriptive comparative genomics analyses, and single species loss-of-function studies. However, whether genetic dependencies diverged in closely related hominin species and how this knowledge could reveal previously unappreciated differences in cellular physiology remains unexplored.

To evaluate the extent of conservation and divergence in genetic dependencies between human and chimpanzee, we established a comparative loss-of-function screening approach in pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). PSCs are a model for the earliest stages of development, capturing features of the inner cell mass of the blastocyst, including the capacity to differentiate into all germ layers at a stage that precedes species differences in developmental timing and cell type composition. The state of pluripotency is well conserved between human and chimpanzee PSCs at the level of the transcriptome, epigenome, and cell fate potential, providing a homologous cell type for species comparison. In addition, PSCs have greater levels of open chromatin and gene expression than somatic cells, enabling large-scale study of gene function for genes later expressed in diverse cell types. As PSCs are poised to self-renew or differentiate into all germ layers based on environmental cues, we reasoned that changes in proliferation in PSCs could provide a sensitive measure for species-specific responses to a wide range of genetic perturbations.

Performing genetic screens using an in vitro model confers several advantages that could support isolation of molecular and cellular species differences. First, the ability to grow large numbers of PSCs enables a pooled library approach with multiple redundant library elements targeting each gene. Second, laboratory cell culture provides a well-defined and highly controlled environment, which minimizes extrinsic sources of variation. Lastly, the scalability of pooled screening allows for retesting of each cellular phenotype in PSCs derived from multiple individuals of each species to account for individual variation within a species. Thus, we conducted genome-wide CRISPR-interference (CRISPRi) screens in human and chimpanzee PSCs. Despite high levels of conservation, our screens revealed that genetic dependencies can diverge in short evolutionary time scales, that species differences are organized into coherent pathways and protein complexes, and that human-specific changes have evolved in gene networks promoting G1/S progression in PSCs and neural progenitor cells. In addition to these specific insights, our study establishes a broadly applicable experimental approach for uncovering latent molecular differences between closely related species.

# Main

## Genome-wide CRISPRi screening in human and chimpanzee stem cells
To enable comparative CRISPR-based genetic screening, we engineered CRISPRi machinery at the CLYBL safe harbor locus in two human and two chimpanzee pluripotent stem cell lines. For the two human individuals, we chose two well-characterized cell lines, WTC11, an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line, and H1, an embryonic stem cell (ESC) line. For the chimpanzee individuals, we chose two iPSC lines used in previous studies: C3649 and Pt5-C.

To identify genes that modify cellular growth and survival, we infected each cell line with the genome-wide lentiviral hCRISPRi-v2 sgRNA library (5 sgRNAs/gene), selected for sgRNA-expressing cells with puromycin, cultured cells for 10 days, and quantified sgRNA enrichment and depletion by high-throughput sequencing. While hCRISPRi-v2 was designed to target the human genome, 77.4% of sgRNAs perfectly matched targets in the chimpanzee reference genome (panTro6); sgRNAs with mismatches were not considered for analyses of species differences. Across all four screens, we observed robust depletion of sgRNAs targeting common essential genes and enrichment of sgRNAs targeting proliferation-suppressor genes. Analysis of technical and biological replicates revealed strong sgRNA correlations for replicates of the same cell line (Pearson's r = 0.80 to 0.97) and for different cell lines within species (r = 0.69 to 0.83). In addition, all four genetic screens sensitively and precisely distinguished Dependency Map (DepMap) common essential and nonessential genes, recalling 82.9% to 92.6% of common essential genes at 95% precision.

We next sought to identify genes with species-specific effects on cellular proliferation. To do so, we utilized MAGeCK and developed a bootstrapping-based method that accounted for both the number of significantly enriched or depleted sgRNAs targeting a gene and the magnitude of sgRNA log2 fold-change. While the large majority of essential genes were shared between species, we identified 583 candidate species-specific essential genes and 202 candidate species-specific proliferation-suppressor genes. Importantly, this approach identified far fewer candidate genes exclusively shared between one individual of each species (n = 3 to 12 genes), highlighting the influence of species on gene essentiality. As an additional quality control, we confirmed that sgRNAs targeting regulators of apoptosis such as BAK1 and BAD were enriched in all four PSCs. We unexpectedly discovered that sgRNAs targeting TP53 were enriched only in the two human cell lines, suggesting that the two chimpanzee PSC lines used in primary screening were p53-unresponsive. We reasoned that a fraction of the candidate species differences might thus be attributable to p53 status and would require additional testing with p53-responsive chimpanzee cell lines. In conclusion, our approach shows that genome-wide CRISPRi screening can be applied to closely related species to establish a comparative essential-ome and to nominate candidate species differences.

## Human and chimpanzee can be distinguished by genetic dependencies
We next sought to validate candidate species differences across multiple independently-derived human and chimpanzee PSCs to distinguish species differences from those driven by individual variation, adaptation to cell culture, or somatic cell reprogramming. We engineered new CRISPRi stem cell lines from four human (H20961B, H21792A, H23555A, H28126B) and four chimpanzee (C3624K, C8861G, C40280L, C40290F) individuals. To minimize technical variation, we selected high quality cell lines with normal karyotypes that were reprogrammed with identical protocols and maintained in identical media. Cell lines from both species were previously shown to differentiate into all three germ layers via teratoma formation and embryoid body assays, functionally validating pluripotency. Finally, the human and chimpanzee lines were previously shown to share comparable pluripotency scores with strongly overlapping patterns of H3K27me3 and H3K27ac at pluripotency genes and similar transcriptional trajectories of differentiation, suggesting that the cell lines were in a comparable state of pluripotency. We used bulk RNA-seq to verify that the CRISPRi-engineered cell lines exhibited comparably high expression levels of canonical pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, and NANOG, compared to the original source lines. No significant expression differences were observed for these genes in our human and chimpanzee engineered cell lines (p = 0.42, 0.98, and 0.94, two-tailed t-test). We analyzed copy number variation using CaSpER and genome sequencing coverage to rule out the presence of large duplications or deletions. In addition, we assessed CRISPRi cell lines for p53-responsiveness by measuring sensitivity to nutlin-3a, a small molecule MDM2 inhibitor that induces p53-dependent autophagy and apoptosis. All 11 new human and chimpanzee lines plus WTC11 and H1 were MDM2/p53-responsive, while C3649 and Pt5-C, the chimpanzee lines used in the primary screen, were p53-unresponsive.

To enable secondary screening, we designed a comparative essential validation (CEV-v1) library consisting of 7,847 sgRNAs targeting the transcriptional start sites of 963 genes from our genome-scale datasets (8 sgRNAs per gene) and 1,845 negative-control sgRNAs. Due to the scalability of pooled screening, we targeted an inclusive set of genes with significant or suggestive differences between species in the primary screens as well as gene families with notable evolutionary histories. To reduce human-specific bias, we required that every sgRNA in CEV-v1 perfectly match target sites in the human (hg38) and chimpanzee (panTro6) reference genomes. In total, we performed 16 CRISPRi screens using the CEV-v1 sgRNA library. The validation screens were performed in the four newly constructed CRISPRi PSC lines of each species. In addition, we retested three of the four PSC lines used for genome-scale screening (Pearson's r = 0.76 to 0.89) and performed biological replicate screens in separate laboratories for five cell lines (3 human lines, 2 chimpanzee lines, r = 0.70 to 0.92). Notably, hierarchical clustering of cell lines by the similarity of their sgRNA profiles separated all the human (including ESCs and iPSCs) from all the chimpanzee individuals. Decomposition of each cell line's sgRNA profile by principal component analysis also grouped individuals by species, with the main axes of variation relating to shared changes in sgRNA representation over time (PC1) and species-specific changes (PC2). Together, our findings show that stem cells from humans and chimpanzees can be distinguished by their responses to genetic perturbations.

## Molecular nature of core species-specific genetic dependencies
We next sought to identify genes underlying the differences between human and chimpanzee sgRNA profiles. We used DESeq2 to model sgRNA counts from all human and chimpanzee CEV-v1 screens and contrasted the species terms to detect sgRNAs with divergent effects on cellular proliferation. We identified 1,133 sgRNAs with evidence for differences between species (1% false discovery rate (FDR), | chimpanzee-human log2 fold-change | ≥ 0.5), while negative-control sgRNAs were tightly distributed around zero. Using α-RRA to combine sgRNA p-values, we found 75 genes with robust species-specific effects on cellular proliferation at a 1% FDR. This reduction in the number of genes from the CEV-v1 library was the result of a combination of factors: 1) the use of more stringent statistical thresholds, 2) a fraction of genes that replicated in validation screens of the original cell lines but not in the additional cell lines 3) the exclusion of genes whose effects on cellular proliferation depended on TP53 status. Together, these findings reveal a stringent set of species-specific genetic dependencies that emerged in recent human and chimpanzee evolution.

We first explored whether species-specific genetic dependencies could relate to changes in the coding sequence or regulation of the target genes themselves that might suggest divergent species-specific activities of these genes. Several genes in the set exhibited unexpected coding sequence changes. For example, ASPM, which causes microcephaly when mutated, contains protein domains with signatures of positive selection in the human lineage and was essential in human but not chimpanzee PSCs. Similarly, KATNA1, which physically interacts with ASPM to promote microtubule disassembly at mitotic spindle poles, contains a nearly fixed modern human-specific mutation that is distinct from the Neanderthal and chimpanzee allele and acted as a suppressor of proliferation in chimpanzee but not human cells. However, these examples were exceptions, and signatures of adaptive selection, as well as overall non-synonymous substitutions, were depleted among the set of 75 species-specific genetic dependencies compared to the genome wide distribution (p < 0.01, p < 10^-6, respectively, Kolmogorov-Smirnov test). Several genes with divergent genetic dependencies also displayed quantitative gene expression changes. For example, MTCH2, a gene involved in mitochondrial metabolism and apoptosis displayed significantly higher expression in human PSCs (fold change = 1.28, FDR < 10^-3) and was specifically essential in human PSCs. In contrast, ACAT2, a gene involved in lipid metabolism, exhibited significantly higher expression in chimpanzee PSCs (fold change = 2.73, FDR < 10^-6), but was also specifically essential in human cells. Despite these examples, the 75 gene set was also depleted for species differences in gene expression (p = 0.035, two-tailed t-test). Together, these analyses suggest that coding or regulatory changes in CRISPRi target genes themselves do not account for the majority of species-specific growth differences.

We next asked whether species-specific genetic dependencies involved groups of genes known to interact, a pattern that could suggest divergent requirements for conserved pathways. As essentiality phenotypes are typically shared among genes within known functional modules, such coherence could also provide an additional test of internal consistency. Indeed, functionally related genes emerged with consistent patterns of depletion or enrichment within each species. Analysis using the STRING database revealed an enrichment for protein-protein interactions (p < 10^-6) and components of several well established biological processes. For example, we observed that all five core components of the UFMylation pathway (UFM1, UFL1, UFC1, UBA5, DDRGK1) were essential only in human PSCs. By contrast, all four subunits of the MOZ histone acetyltransferase complex (KAT6A, BRPF1, ING5, EAF6) acted as proliferation suppressors in chimpanzee PSCs. Accessory proteins to the vacuolar-type ATPase (ATP6AP1, ATP6AP2) and the highest ranking DepMap co-dependent gene WDR7, were specifically essential in human PSCs, whereas core subunits were essential in both species. Strikingly, human PSCs were robust to depletion of cell cycle regulators cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2), its activating partner Cyclin E1 (CCNE1), and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4). For all three genes, we observed at least six sgRNAs that were essential across six chimpanzee individuals but nonessential across six human individuals.

The consistent depletion of many sgRNAs targeting the same gene and multiple genes involved in the same biological process indicates that off-target activity is unlikely to explain proliferation differences between species. In principle, species-specific differences could also result from differential effectiveness of CRISPRi-mediated transcriptional repression (e.g., due to histone occupancy or transcriptional start site variability). To evaluate this possibility, we measured the efficacy of sgRNA-mediated repression for several candidate genes (CDK2, CCNE1, and RBL1). In all cases, measurements of transcript abundance by qRT-PCR revealed >90% knockdown in both species, suggesting that proliferation differences were not driven by incomplete knockdown efficiency in one species. In summary, these results highlight the ability of our screening approach to isolate biologically meaningful networks of genes that mediate species differences in cell behavior when perturbed, in contrast to gene expression profiling, which often reveals a complex mixture of both direct and indirect effects.

## Human-specific sensitivity to perturbations to lysosomal V-ATPase
While both our primary screen and validation screens measured growth and survival, changes in proliferation can reflect a wide range of cellular phenotypes, from differentiation to growth factor signaling. We next investigated the human-specific sensitivity to loss of ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2. ATP6AP1 and ATP6AP2 are accessory proteins to the lysosomal V-type ATPase. As the main proton pump responsible for maintaining the pH gradient of the lysosome, non-duplicated core subunits of the V-ATPase were essential in both species, as expected. Cryo-electron microscopy of the V-ATPase complex has implicated ATP6AP1 in the assembly of the V0 complex of the V-ATPase. In addition, ATP6AP1 is comprised of a transmembrane helix and an extensive luminal domain that bears extensive structural homology to lysosomal-associated membrane proteins (LAMPs) and forms extensive contacts with ATP6AP2. Staining with LysoTracker Red and LysoSensor green in ATP6AP1 depleted cells revealed no significant defects in maintenance of lysosomal pH. These results are consistent with the core function of V-ATPase being strictly essential. However, loss of ATP6AP1 has also been implicated in major cellular signaling pathways that are mediated by the lysosome. Thus, we performed a western blot to measure phosphorylation of ribosomal protein RPS6 (pS6), a well-established downstream metric of mTORC1 activity. Depletion of ATP6AP1 or ATP6AP2 resulted in diminished pS6 signal in both species. However, pS6 was selectively abolished in human cells depleted for ATP6AP1. These data thus link the human-specific growth defect of ATP6AP1 sgRNAs observed in our pooled screens to an increased reliance of human cells on ATP6AP1-mediated mTORC1 signaling.

## Human PSCs are robust to depletion of CDK2 and Cyclin E
We next investigated whether chimpanzee-specific sensitivity to loss of several cell cycle genes could be linked to changes in cell cycle progression following repression of these genes. To do so, we measured the proportion of cells in G1, S-phase and G2/M via incorporation of the thymidine analogue 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) and Hoechst, a DNA-binding dye. Consistent with the early mammalian embryo, PSCs undergo rapid cell cycle progression with a shortened G1 phase compared to somatic cells. For wild-type cells, only ~10% of cells were classified in G1 phase. However, the absolute fraction of G1 cells was influenced by environmental factors such as confluence and nutrient availability. Therefore, we measured the effect of CRISPRi-mediated gene repression in an internally controlled co-culture, with wild-type cells (GFP-) and sgRNA-expressing cells (GFP+) mixed within the same well. Knockdown of CDK2 or Cyclin E1 in chimpanzee PSCs led to a roughly two-fold accumulation of cells in G1 (p < 10^-3 for both, two-tailed t-test), consistent with the well-established role of Cyclin E1-CDK2 in regulating the G1/S transition. By contrast, knockdown of CDK2 in human PSCs had no effect on cell cycle progression, and knockdown of Cyclin E1 produced only a limited accumulation of G1 cells. We confirmed that these differences were not mediated by incomplete sgRNA-mediated knockdown in human PSCs. In addition, differences in cell viability were minor and no species differences in G1 proportions were observed in the absence of cell cycle perturbations. Lastly, we confirmed that the sgCDK2-mediated increase in G1 length could be observed in chimpanzee cells via live imaging with a FUCCI reporter. Thus, our data suggest that human PSCs are less dependent on Cyclin E1-CDK2 for G1/S phase transition than chimpanzee PSCs.

Cyclin E1-CDK2 is a central regulator of the G1/S cell cycle transition and is commonly essential and frequently dysregulated across human cancer cell lines. In contrast, Cdk2-/- knockout mice are fully viable and develop normally, though with reduced body size. Subsequent studies showed that cell cycle progression could be rescued in the absence of Cyclin E1-CDK2 by Cyclin A-CDK1 and Cyclin E-CDK1 activity. Therefore, we reasoned that human cells might compensate for the loss of Cyclin E1-CDK2 via stronger Cyclin A2-CDK1 activity, as cyclin homologs Cyclin E2 and Cyclin A1 are not expressed in PSCs. Consistent with this model, CDK1 was more highly expressed in human PSCs (FDR < 10^-2), while CDK2 and Cyclin E1 were more highly expressed in chimpanzee PSCs (FDR < 10^-3). As a functional test, we overexpressed CDK1 in chimpanzee PSCs in conjunction with sgRNA-mediated repression of CDK2 or Cyclin E1 and quantified the progression of cells through G1 phase. We found that 2.5-fold overexpression of CDK1 was sufficient for rescuing the sensitivity of chimpanzee PSCs to CDK2 or Cyclin E1 depletion and accelerated progression through G1/S phase transition.

Next, we extended our co-culture studies to additional cell cycle regulators with known interactions with Cyclin E-CDK2. Given the dependence of chimpanzee PSCs on cyclin E-CDK2, we reasoned that repression of an inhibitor of this Cyclin-CDK complex might have species-specific effects on cell cycle progression. We first investigated the consequences of repressing retinoblastoma-like 1 (RBL1/p107), a tumor suppressor homologous to retinoblastoma protein (RB). RBL1, like RB, represses cell cycle via inhibition of E2F transcription factors. However, E2F is de-repressed in rapidly-dividing stem cells compared to other cell types due to the need for rapid cell cycling. Indeed, repression of RB did not elicit a growth effect in either species, consistent with E2F de-repression and prior studies of PSCs. In contrast, RBL1 possesses an ability unique among RB family proteins to directly inhibit the kinase activities of cyclin A/E-CDK2. Repression of RBL1 resulted in faster growth and a reduction in the fraction of cells in G1 in both species. However, RBL1 effects were larger for chimpanzee cells (p < 0.01, two-tailed t-test). Given the accumulation of chimpanzee PSCs in G1 upon repression of Cyclin E or CDK2, these results further support a model in which cyclin E-CDK2 exerts greater control over G1/S transition in chimpanzee compared to human PSCs.

In addition, we examined the chimpanzee-specific sensitivity to depletion of FAM122A, a cell cycle regulator that acts upstream of CDK1/2 via interactions with CHK1 and PP2A. FAM122A acts as an inhibitor of phosphatase PP2A-B55α, which in turn acts in opposition to CDK1 and CDK2 by dephosphorylating key substrates such as WEE1 and CDC25. We observed that loss of FAM122A phenocopied loss of CDK2 and led to accumulation of G1 cells in chimpanzee PSCs, but not in human (p < 0.05, two-tailed t-test). This species difference appeared to be independent of WEE1 accumulation as FAM122A-depleted chimpanzee cells exhibited increased sensitivity to the WEE1 inhibitor adavosertib, suggesting that the effects of FAM122A loss may depend on other PP2A targets, such as CDC25A. Moreover, we observed that FAM122A depletion in PSCs of both species promoted resistance to the CHK1 inhibitor prexasertib, highlighting the conserved upstream interaction between FAM122A and CHK1.

Finally, we applied pharmacological approaches to examine species differences in enforcing cell cycle checkpoint. Because rapid cell divisions render PSCs sensitive to replication stress and DNA damage, we tested whether wild-type human and chimpanzee PSCs would respond differently to CHK1 and WEE1 inhibition in the absence of genetic perturbations. To do so, we mixed GFP-tagged human cells with mCherry-tagged chimpanzee cells in a ~50/50 co-culture competition experiment. With no drug treatment, the proportion of human and chimpanzee cells remained unchanged. However, upon either prexasertib or adavosertib treatment, we observed substantially higher survival of chimpanzee cells compared to human cells. Collectively, these genetic and pharmacological results suggest that chimpanzee PSCs may enforce a more robust S phase and G2/M checkpoint compared to human PSCs, with higher endogenous CDK1 levels providing a potential mechanism for human PSCs to overcome inactivation of CDK2, FAM122A, CHK1, or WEE1 to promote cell cycle re-entry.

## Cell cycle perturbations alter neural progenitor cell expansion
We wondered whether the molecular differences that we observed between species in stem cells would also manifest in differentiated cell types. As differences in G1/S regulation have long been hypothesized as an evolutionary mechanism for changing brain size, we investigated whether human-specific robustness to depletion of cell cycle factors would persist in neural progenitor cells (NPCs). Previous studies have established both the necessity and sufficiency of genes promoting G1/S transition for proliferative NPC divisions in animal model systems. However, it is not known whether human NPCs possess recently evolved characteristics that imbue them with an enhanced ability to maintain proliferative divisions. We generated CRISPRi human and chimpanzee NPCs and assessed how depletion of Cyclin E1, CDK2, RBL1, and FAM122A affected cell cycle progression and self-renewal. In contrast to PSCs, NPCs undergo substantially slower progression through cell cycle, with ~50% of cells in G1 phase compared to ~10% in PSC. Nonetheless, knockdown of Cyclin E1 (p < 0.05, two-tailed t-test) or CDK2 (p < 10^-3, two-tailed t-test) caused an additional accumulation of chimpanzee, but not human, NPCs in G1. Meanwhile, RBL1 knockdown reduced the fraction of G1 cells in both human and chimpanzee. Depletion of FAM122A resulted in G2/M accumulation in chimpanzee but not human NPCs, implying a greater role for PP2A activation at G2 in chimpanzee NPCs compared to PSCs.

We further tested the species-specific responses to genetic perturbations in cerebral organoids. Quantifications of organoid size at day 18 revealed that human organoid development was robust to depletion of CDK2, CDK4, or CCNE1 but sensitive to depletion of ATP6AP1. However, chimpanzee organoids seeded with cells expressing sgRNAs targeting CDK2, CDK4, or CCNE1 were substantially smaller. To examine whether these size differences arose from changes in growth at the earliest stages of patterning versus ongoing differences in neural progenitor proliferation, we measured G1-phase length in day 9 organoids. We confirmed that depletion of CDK2 in chimpanzee organoids continued to impair proliferation and resulted in a larger fraction of cells in G1 phase, with no such effect observed in the corresponding human organoids. These results suggest that the increased robustness of human NPCs to depletion of regulators of G1/S progression could potentially bias human cells towards prolonged proliferative divisions, as has been proposed by developmental models.

## Evolutionary origin of molecular species-differences
To determine the evolutionary origin of human- and chimpanzee-specific genetic dependencies, we extended our comparative studies to orangutan PSCs. While humans and chimpanzees diverged roughly seven million years ago, orangutans diverged from other great apes 13-18 million years ago. Thus, we could infer by maximum parsimony that any genetic dependencies shared between orangutans and chimpanzees but not humans were likely to have been present in the common ancestor and subsequently diverged in the human lineage. We performed three-way species comparisons across genes representing several biological processes with coherent species differences in our dataset using sgRNAs with perfectly matched targets in all three species. For two sgRNAs targeting CDK2, we observed a significant depletion of sgRNA-expressing cells over the course of ten days in both chimpanzee and orangutan PSCs. In contrast, no such depletion was observed in human PSCs. We further confirmed that the differences we observed were not due to differences in sgRNA activity, as knockdown efficiency exceeded 90% in all three species. In addition, we further observed human-specific robustness to repression of CDK4 and Cyclin E1. Based on these data, we inferred that robustness to perturbations of the G1/S transition evolved along the human lineage, otherwise dependence on CDK2, CDK4, and Cyclin E1 would have had to evolve on two separate occasions in the chimpanzee and orangutan lineages with the same direction of effect for each gene. Next, we evaluated the human-specific sensitivity to repression of ATP6AP1. We observed that the ATP6AP1 sensitivity was not shared by chimpanzee or orangutan PSCs, suggesting that altered responses to cellular metabolism, including the increased reliance on ATP6AP1 for mTORC1 signaling that we observed, also evolved along the human lineage.

By contrast, repression of KAT6A promoted proliferation in chimpanzee PSCs but not in human or orangutan PSCs, arguing that this molecular feature was derived in chimpanzees. Similarly, sensitivity to UFL1 repression was common to human and orangutan PSCs but diverged in chimpanzee PSCs. In sum, our data indicate that distinct genetic dependencies arose recently in both the human and chimpanzee lineages, highlighting the importance of experimentally defining the extent, identity, and phylogenetic origin of cellular and molecular differences derived in humans to inform our understanding of human evolution.

# Discussion
Loss-of-function screens have provided fundamental insights into the genes that regulate the development of model organisms. Here, we applied genetic screens to human and chimpanzee PSCs to examine whether the requirements for essential genes could differ in closely related species. By performing paired genome-wide CRISPRi screens, we uncovered a landscape of divergent genetic dependencies. Despite human and chimpanzee PSCs being similar in their cellular morphology, response to in vitro differentiation protocols, and core set of essential genes, we identified 75 genes with divergent roles in controlling cellular proliferation. We observed that many of these genes were organized in coherent protein complexes and biochemical pathways. By contrast, existing state-of-the-art comparative approaches, including RNA-seq and chromatin state profiling have identified thousands of differentially expressed and accessible genes between humans and nonhuman primates, but are unable to directly evaluate the role of each gene in key cellular processes such as survival, proliferation, and differentiation. In addition, limited coherence among differentially expressed genes makes it difficult to pinpoint divergent pathways or protein complexes. Our data thus comprise a rich resource that interfaces with existing studies of gene regulation and chromatin states and provide a functional genomics guide for future candidate gene approaches.

How might the genetic dependencies we observed in PSCs relate to organismal differences that manifest during development? Intriguingly, one of the strongest observations that emerged from our unbiased genome-wide screening approach was human-specific robustness to depletion of cell cycle factors, which persisted in neural progenitor cells. This finding aligns with long-standing hypotheses that changes in cell cycle regulation could play a role in human-specific cortical expansion. The G1-phase length hypothesis proposes that factors which lengthen G1 duration in NPCs increase the probability of differentiation towards non-proliferative neuronal fates, while factors reducing G1 length promote proliferative self-renewal of NPCs. Indeed, loss of CDK2 or CDK4 in mouse NPCs prolongs G1 length and causes premature neuronal differentiation at the expense of self-renewal. Conversely, exogenous overexpression of CDK4 and Cyclin D1 in mouse and ferret reduces G1 length, promotes self-renewing divisions in basal progenitor cells, and results in increased brain size and cortical area, while preserving a structurally normal, six-layered cortex. In humans, mutations that promote cyclin D2 stability lead to megalencephaly. These studies underscore the influence of inputs to the G1/S transition on brain expansion during development. However, whether this developmental mechanism changed specifically in recent human evolution remained unexplored. Our demonstration that human NPCs are more likely than chimpanzee NPCs to continue cycling upon equivalent repression of CDK2 or Cyclin E1 connects proposed developmental mechanisms to molecular changes that occurred in human evolution. Although physiological stressors do occur during development that influence the size of the neural progenitor pool, it remains unknown how external environmental stimuli or the intrinsic tempo of differentiation might differ between humans and chimpanzees and interface with these evolved molecular differences.

The endeavor to study the molecular basis of human evolution has been compared to searching for needles in a haystack, as human-specific genetic variants and gene expression changes are numerous and predominantly neutral. By contrast, our finding that human and chimpanzee PSCs exhibit distinct genetic dependencies, even for genes that lack clear expression or protein-coding sequence divergence, provides a complementary approach for isolating recently evolved functional changes in human gene networks. This conceptual advance mirrors the progression of cancer genetics research from sequencing and transcriptomics efforts such as TCGA to functional genetics-based efforts such as DepMap. Moreover, while driver mutations can be identified in tumors based on their independent recurrence, human evolution has occurred only once, highlighting the added value of a functional genomics platform. We expect that loss-of-function profiling can be extended to cellular models of genetic variation and disease risk within humans to identify shared vulnerabilities and convergent pathway level differences. Lastly, our approach can be readily applied in differentiated cell types and interfaced with higher dimensional measurements of cell phenotypes, opening the door to future efforts for understanding molecular control of species differences across stages of development.

While our study systematically maps species-specific genetic dependencies in pluripotent stem cells, it is unclear which dependencies will persist across diverse differentiation trajectories and whether new cell type-specific dependencies will arise. We applied a principled and systematic exploration of the changes in the genetic landscape that evolved during the short divergence time between humans and chimpanzees. However, to further connect human-specific robustness to depletion of cell cycle regulators to physiological differences in brain development, we will need to understand how naturally occurring environmental factors can produce species differences in NPC cell cycle properties and proliferative potential. In addition, the in vitro models of NPCs that we employed produce homologous cell types to those found in vivo, but may exhibit differences in metabolism, spatial architecture, and maturation speed. Finally, our primary screen unexpectedly included two P53-non-responsive chimpanzee cell lines, which we accounted for by constructing four additional P53-responsive cell lines in the validation screen. The frequency of pro-survival adaptations in PSCs highlights the need for multiple representatives of each species and quality controls (such as the Nutlin-3a assay) to distinguish species differences from line-to-line variation.

# Methods

## RESOURCE AVAILABILITY

Lead Contact
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Alex A Pollen (Alex.Pollen@ucsf.edu).

Materials availability
Materials used in this study will be provided upon request and available upon publication.

## Data and code availability
- Raw sequencing data are deposited on GEO accession number GSE212297.
- All code for the analyses performed on the CRISPRi screens is publicly available at https://github.com/tdfair.
- Any additional information required to reanalyze the data reported in this paper is available from the lead contact upon request.

## EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND STUDY PARTICIPANT DETAILS

Cell Lines
Human embryonic cell line H1 (WiCell), human induced pluripotent stem cell lines (20961B, 21792A, 23555A, 28126B, WTC11), and chimpanzee induced pluripotent stem cell lines (3624K, C3649, 40280L, 40290F, 8861G, Pt5-C).

Additional details for cell lines used in this study are provided in Supplementary Table S1.

Media Formulations
mTESR1 was purchased from Stem Cell Technologies and supplemented with 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 292 µg/ml L-glutamine (Gibco). StemFlex was purchased from Gibco and supplemented with 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 292 µg/ml L-glutamine. HEK293Ts were cultured in DMEM (ThermoFisher) and supplemented with 10% FBS (VWR), 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 292 µg/ml L-glutamine. Neuronal differentiation media was prepared with DMEM F/12 (ThermoFisher), CTS Neurobasal Medium (ThermoFisher), 1x N-2 supplement CTS (ThermoFisher), 10 µM SB431542 (StemMACS, TGF β inhibitor; Miltenyi), 100 ng/ml Noggin (recombinant human; Miltenyi), and 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 µg/ml streptomycin, and 292 µg/ml L-glutamine. Thiazovivin (Stem Cell Technologies) was included at a concentration of 2 µM during passaging. The CEPT cocktail consisting of 50 nM chroman 1 (Tocris Bioscience), 5 µM emricasan (Selleck Chemicals), polyamine supplement diluted 1:1000 (Sigma-Aldrich), and 0.7 µM trans-ISRIB (Tocris Bioscience) was included during single cell sorting and lipofection.

Cerebral organoids were seeded in Sasai media #1 (GMEM supplemented with 20% KSR, 1x Penicillin/Streptomycin/Glutamate, 0.11 mg/mL sodium pyruvate, 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 10 µM thiazovivin, 5 µM SB431542, 200 nM LDN-193189, and 1 µM Wnt-C59). Wnt inhibitor Wnt-C59 was withdrawn after day 6.

Construction of CRISPRi cell lines
All wildtype cell lines tested negative for mycoplasma prior to the start of cell line engineering. The CRISPRi effector protein dCas9KRAB (KOX1) was introduced into either the CLYBL or AAVS1 safe harbor locus. For the AAVS1 locus, cell lines were constructed via lipofection of three plasmids: 1) A modified version of pX458, containing both Cas9 nuclease and a sgRNA targeting AAVS1. The sgRNA spacer was modified from the original plasmid by cutting with type IIS restriction endonuclease BbsI-HF. Complementary oligos containing the sgRNA spacer and proper overhangs were annealed and ligated with T4 ligase. 2) A modified version of the previously published Gen3-AAVS1 vector containing an optimized dCas9-XTEN-KRAB-P2A-EGFP or mCherry driven by the chicken beta-actin (CAG) promoter, flanked by homology arms to AAVS1. 3) pEF1-BCL-XL, a plasmid expressing BCL-XL, the anti-apoptotic isoform of BCL2L1, from the EF-1α promoter. For the CLYBL locus, four plasmids were lipofected based on previously published methods: 1) pZT-C13-L1 2) pZT-C13-R1, with plasmids 1 and 2 encoding TALENs that target the CLYBL locus. 3) dCas9-XTEN-KRAB-P2A-BFP and 4) pEF-BCL-X. Lipofection was performed as follows: two days prior to transfection, cells were switched into mTESR1 media on a non-passaging day. One day prior to transfection, ~400,000 cells were plated into a Matrigel-coated 6-well plate with mTESR1 supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin. On the day of transfection, a 3 µg mixture of plasmids 1-3 was made at a mass ratio of 5:5:1, added to a mixture of 96 µl Opti-MEM and 4 µl Lipofectamine Stem, and incubated at room temperature for 10 minutes. Media was aspirated from the PSC plate and replaced with 2 ml Opti-MEM supplemented with CEPT. The lipid/plasmid DNA complexes were then added to the cells and incubated at 37°C for 2 hours, after which 2 ml of mTESR1 with CEPT was added. Media was replaced with mTESR1 24 hours post-transfection. Fluorescent cells were isolated by FACS 3 to 5 days post-transfection.

## METHOD DETAILS

Primers
All primers used in this study are listed in Supplementary Table 6.

Nutlin-3a pharmacological assay for testing TP53/MDM2 responsiveness
CRISPRi engineered cell lines were tested for TP53/MDM2 responsiveness based on sensitivity to Nutlin-3a, an active enantiomer of Nutlin-3, which is a small molecule MDM2 inhibitor that induces p53-dependent autophagy and apoptosis. Cells were passaged with Versene (PBS-EDTA) to avoid use of ROCK inhibitor, which promotes survival. 80-100% confluent wells were split 1 to 1 and plated densely into new wells with StemFlex supplemented with 10 µM Nutlin-3a. Consistent with previous reports, TP53/MDM2 responsive cell lines underwent apoptosis within 24 hours.

Lentivirus production, concentration, and titration
Lentivirus for CRISPRi screening was produced in HEK293T cells. HEK293Ts were seeded at a density of 80,000 cells/cm^2 24 hr. prior to transfection in 15 cm dishes. Next, each dish was transduced with 20 µg sgRNA library, 6.75 µg standard lentivirus packaging vectors, and 81 µl Mirus transfection reagent in Opti-MEM. 24 hr. post-transfection, media was replaced and supplemented with 1X ViralBoost. Supernatant was collected at 48 hr. post-transfection and concentrated 1:10 with Lenti-X Concentrator. Concentrated lentivirus was titered in PSCs based on BFP expression 3 days post-infection using a flow cytometer.

Pooled genome-wide CRISPRi screening
CRISPRi PSCs expressing dCas9KRAB were dissociated with Accutase, resuspended in StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin and 5 µg/ml polybrene, transduced with the lentiviral hCRISPRi-v2 sgRNA library at a target infection rate of 25-40%, and plated in Matrigel-coated 5-layer cell culture flasks at a density of 65,000-80,000 cells/cm^2. The following day, StemFlex medium was replaced. Two days after infection, cells were dissociated with Accutase, resuspended in StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin and 1.5 µg/ml puromycin, and plated in 5-layer cell culture flasks. The following day, medium was replaced with StemFlex supplemented with 1.5 µg/ml puromycin. Four days after infection, 100 M cells were harvested for the initial time point (t0), while 250-300 M cells were resuspended in StemFlex supplemented with 1.5 µg/ml puromycin and plated in 5-layer cell culture flasks (>1000x sgRNA library representation). Selection efficiency was assessed by flow cytometry (>70% BFP+). Every two days, cells were dissociated with Accutase, resuspended in StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin, and plated at a density of 80,000-100,000 cells/cm^2. Technical replicates were cultured separately for the duration of the screen. After 10 days of growth, 150 M cells from each technical replicate were harvested for the final time point (tfinal). Genomic DNA was isolated from frozen cell pellets using the Macherey-Nagel NucleoSpin Blood XL kit. Isolated DNA was quantified using a NanoDrop and the sgRNA expression cassette was amplified by 22 cycles of PCR using NEBNext Ultra II Q5 Master Mix and primers containing Illumina P5/P7 termini and sample-specific TruSeq indices. Each sample was distributed into 150-200 individual 100 µl reactions in 96-well plates.

CEV-v1 validation screening library design
To validate genome-wide screens, a Comparative Essential Validation (CEV-v1) sgRNA library consisting of 9,692 sgRNAs targeting 963 candidate species-specific essential or proliferation suppressor genes was constructed. hCRISPRi-v2 sgRNAs with perfect-match targets in panTro6 exhibiting significant depletion or enrichment in the genome-wide screens were retained in CEV-v1 (n = 3589 sgRNAs). In addition, new sgRNAs with perfect-match target sites in the human (hg38) and chimpanzee (panTro6) reference genomes were chosen based on their position relative to the FANTOM-annotated transcriptional start site, on-target activity predicted by DeepHF, and off-target potential predicted by a genome-wide search of mismatched target sites in both reference genomes. Briefly, after performing off-target filtering (one perfect-match target, CRISPRi specificity score > 0.20, maximal predicted activity at any off-target site < 0.80), candidate sgRNAs were categorized by their position relative to the FANTOM TSS and then ranked by their DeepHF score. A threshold DeepHF score was imposed by excluding sgRNAs with predicted activities less than one standard deviation below the mean of all candidate sgRNAs (minimum score: 0.4378). Eight sgRNAs were selected for each gene as well as 1845 non-targeting sgRNAs from hCRISPRi-v2. Oligonucleotide pools were designed with flanking PCR and restriction sites (BstXI, BlpI), synthesized by Agilent Technologies, and cloned into the sgRNA expression vector pCRISPRia-v2 as described previously.

Pooled validation CRISPRi screening
Validation screens were performed in conditions consistent with the genome-wide screens. Briefly, CRISPRi PSCs expressing dCas9-KRAB were dissociated with Accutase, resuspended in StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin and 5 µg/ml polybrene, transduced with the lentiviral CEV-v1 sgRNA library at a target infection rate of 25-40%, and plated in Matrigel-coated 3-layer cell culture flasks at a density of 65,000-80,000 cells/cm^2. Cells were dissociated, plated, selected with puromycin, and grown on the same schedule as used for the genome-wide screens. Technical replicates were cultured separately for the duration of the screen and >1000x sgRNA library representation was maintained.

In addition to assessing the reproducibility of species-specific genetic dependencies across biological replicates (n = 5 human cell lines and n = 6 chimpanzee cell lines), we also assessed reproducibility between screens and across sites. 3 out of 4 PSC lines from the initial screen were re-tested with the CEV-v1 validation library. Several individual cell lines were screened twice (H20961B, H23555A, H28126B, C3624K, C8861G), with replicate screens performed independently at the Whitehead Institute and UCSF. 4 out of the 5 lines retested at both UCSF and Whitehead were independently constructed CRISPRi cell lines from the same source iPSC line, with CRISPRi machinery inserted at either the AAVS1 or CLYBL locus with either GFP, mCherry, or BFP as fluorescent markers.

Quantitative RT-PCR
Triplicates of human (28126B), chimpanzee (40280L), and orangutan (11045-4593) PSCs were grown in a 6-well plate and infected with sgRNAs at an MOI of ~0.3. 48 hours post-infection, cells were expanded in 2 µg/ml puromycin and allowed to recover for 48 hours. At post-infection day 4, sgRNA-expressing cells were sorted based on BFP+ expression using a Sony MA900. sgRNA-expressing cells were isolated by FACS as the depletion of cells containing essential sgRNAs occurred more rapidly than the removal of sgRNA-negative cells through puromycin selection.

Cells were then allowed to recover for 48-96 hours, until they reached ~60-80% confluence on a 6-well plate and were harvested 6 to 8 days post-infection. For each biological replicate, RNA was extracted with a Direct-zol RNA miniprep kit. RNA was reverse transcribed with SuperScript IV VILO, and cDNA was amplified with the DyNAmo ColorFlash SYBR Green kit. Primers for GAPDH were used as loading controls and no-RT controls were performed to control for genomic DNA contamination. Amplifications were performed in duplicate and quantified on a QuantStudio Flex 7 Real-Time PCR system in 96-well plates. Final data points reported are averages of the two duplicate qRT-PCR amplifications.

While knockdown measurements include triplicate infections, some measurements for which triplicates were not recovered are reported as two replicates or single measurements. The remaining conditions were performed in triplicate.

Copy number variation analysis
Chromosomal copy number variations (CNV) were inferred with the InferCNV R package, which predicts CNVs based on gene expression data. InferCNV was run in 'subclusters' analysis mode using 'random_trees' as the subclustering method with gene expression quantified for both species by alignment to the hg38 reference genome. Average gene expression across all six individuals in each species was used as the background column. The cut-off for the minimum average read count per gene among reference cells was set to 1, per software recommendation for bulk RNA-seq data. CNV prediction was performed with the 'i6' Hidden Markov Model, whose output CNV states were filtered with the included Bayesian mixture model with a threshold of 0.1 to find the most confident CNVs. All other options were set to their default values.

To check for copy number variation at a selected set of cell cycle-related genes, we analyzed whole-genome shotgun sequencing data. Genomic DNA from all libraries sequenced on an Illumina sequencer in 151 bp paired-end mode was provided for analysis and mapped to chimpanzee reference panTro6 using bwa-mem2 with default parameters. PicardTools was used to add read group information and mark duplicates, and baseline coverage histograms were generated using BEDTools genomecov, from which the 5th, 50th, and 95th percentile of coverage for each library, both genome-wide and across chromosome X, were extracted. Gene-level features for all genes listed as cyclins, cyclin dependent kinases, and class III Cys-based CDC25 phosphatases in the HGNC database were selected from a recent chimpanzee gene annotation and the coverage at each base across the full length of each gene in the set for each library was counted and summed using samtools mpileup. For this step, only primary alignments containing mapped reads not marked as duplicates, with minimum map quality of 20, were considered.

RNA-seq library prep
Wild-type human and chimpanzee cells were growth to 70% confluence and RNA was extracted by adding RNAse-free Trizol to each pellet and processing with the Zymo Research Direct-zol RNA miniprep kit. RNA-seq was performed using the Illumina TruSeq Stranded Total RNA kit according to the manufacturer's instructions, with the exception of the final PCR step for which only 10 cycles were used to prevent overamplification. The final pooled library was sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 (SE50).

Western Blot
Human (28126B) and chimpanzee (40280L) PSCs were transduced with lentiviral constructs containing sgRNAs targeting ATP6AP1 or ATP6AP2. One additional human (21792A) and chimpanzee (8861G) was also separately infected with an sgRNA targeting ATP6AP1. 48 hours post-infection, sgRNA-expressing cells were selected using 1.5 µg/ml puromycin. Cells were then recovered in normal growth media from 4 to 6 days post-infection. Cells were harvested at 6 days post-infection, along with separate wells of three wild-type human (H1, 21792A, 28126B) and three wild-type chimpanzee (3624K, 40280L, 8861G) cell lines. Day 6 was selected as a time point for harvesting because it is roughly the earliest time point at which a pure population of sgRNA expressing cells can be produced for western blots. In addition, growth for additional days can lead to larger differences in cell viability between species. Cells from each well of a 6-well plate were lysed in ice-cold RIPA buffer supplemented with protease inhibitor. After 30 minutes of incubation in lysis buffer at 4°C, cells were centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C. Supernatant was collected and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.

Protein concentrations in each lysate were quantified using a Bradford BCA kit. Lysate was normalized to 1 µg/µl in RIPA buffer. 30 µl of lysate was added to 10 µl of NuPage Sample Buffer (4x), heated to 70°C on a PCR thermocycler, and loaded onto a Bolt 4-12% polyacrylamide gel. The gel was run for 45 minutes at 165 V in MOPS buffer. Protein was then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane with a Bio-Rad Trans-Blot Turbo. The membrane was blocked with Intercept (PBS) Blocking Buffer for 1 hour at RT. Membrane was incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-pS6 primary antibody at a 1:1,000 dilution. Membrane was washed 3x with TBST and incubated with secondary antibody at 1:15,000 dilution. Membrane was washed 3x with TBST and imaged on a LI-COR Odyssey CLX. Afterwards, antibodies were stripped from the membrane with NewBlot IR Stripping Buffer. Membrane was reblotted with anti-GAPDH antibody at 1:1,000 dilution and incubated overnight at 4°C. Membrane was washed 3x with TBST and incubated with secondary antibody at 1:15,000 dilution. Membrane was washed 3x with TBST and imaged on a LI-COR Odyssey CLX.

Cell death and viability analysis
Cell viability and cell death assays were performed on chimpanzee PSC line 40280L. Cells were infected with sgRNAs targeting cell cycle genes CDK2, CDK4, CCNE1, RBL1, or a non-targeting control sgRNA. Cells were infected in triplicate with sgRNAs at 0.3 MOI and selected with addition of 2 µg/ml puromycin from 2 to 4 days post-infection. Cells were recovered from day 4 to day 6 post-infection in StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin to match conditions from the growth screens. Cell viability was measured on a Countess 3 automated cell counter and a Chemometec Nucleocounter NC-202.

Cell cycle EdU staining
Human (28126B) and chimpanzee (40280L) PSCs were infected with pCRISPRia-v2 containing: 1) a targeting sgRNA or 2) a non-targeting sgRNA or 3) a combination of an sgRNA and a CDK1 overexpression ORF expressed from the EF-1α promoter typically used to express GFP and the puromycin resistance cassette. The CDK1 ORF was expressed downstream of sfGFP-P2A and replaced the puromycin resistance cassette. The BFP marker from the original pCRISPRia-v2 construct was replaced with sfGFP to enable use of the BFP channel for Hoechst staining during the cell cycle assay. On the day of infection, cells were transduced with lentivirus and 8 µg/ml polybrene. Lentivirus was titered to MOI ~ 1, such that GFP+ sgRNA expressing cells represented between 25% and 40% of the population at 48 hours post-infection. No puromycin selection was performed to maintain a mixed co-culture of sgRNA expressing cells and uninfected cells. Cells were grown in StemFlex media supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin on the day of infection and withdrawn via replacement of fresh media 24 hours post-infection. Cells were then assayed at Day 6, after being freshly split at Day 5 into ROCKi containing media to prevent over-confluence and nutrient depleted media. This time point was chosen because it is one of the earliest time points at which cells have recovered from lentivirus infection and after sgRNA-mediated gene repression has been fully activated. In addition, growth for additional days could lead to larger differences in cell viability or growth rate between species.

Cell cycle phase measurements were performed with the Click-iT Plus EdU Alexa Fluor 647 Flow Cytometry Assay Kit. 10 µM EdU was added directly to each well without a fresh media change and cells were incubated for roughly 1 hour, after which cells were harvested with Accutase. The cell pellet was washed once with 500 µl PBS supplemented with 1% BSA, pelleted again, and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes at RT, protected from light. Cells were washed and permeabilized for 15 minutes at RT. EdU detection was then accomplished via click chemistry of an Alexa Fluor 647 to an EdU antibody, which was incubated with cells for 30 minutes at RT. After 1 wash, 10 µg/ml of Hoechst 33342 was added and incubated for 15 minutes. Cells were then directly analyzed by flow cytometry. Data were analyzed with custom MATLAB scripts - after filtering for viable cells and doublets, G1, S, and G2/M gates were manually drawn and saved for each sample. sgRNA+ populations were determined by GFP+ expression, and identical G1, S, and G2/M gates were used for sgRNA+ cells and sgRNA- cells within each sample.

Cell cycle drug treatments
Human iPSC line H28126B and chimpanzee iPSC line C40280L were used. Cells were infected with an sgRNA targeting FAM122A, with 15-30% of cells infected. No puromycin selection was performed. At day 4 post-infection, cells were Accutase passaged into StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin and drug, with prexasertib (Chk1i) or adavosertib (Wee1i) added at 62 nM. At day 6, cells were replated and fresh drug was added to ensure removal of dead cells. At day 8, the fraction of sgRNA+ (BFP+) surviving cells were analyzed by flow cytometry.

Human iPSC line H21792A and chimpanzee iPSC C40280L were co-cultured with a 50/50 initial seeding density. After one normal passage, cells were dissociated with Accutase and passaged in StemFlex supplemented with 2 µM thiazovivin and drug, with prexasertib or adavosertib added at 125 nM. 24hr after drug treatment, cells were replated and fresh drug was added to ensure removal of dead cells. 48 hours post drug treatment, the ratio of human cells (GFP+) chimpanzee cells (mCherry+) was analyzed by flow cytometry.

FUCCI reporter live imaging
An updated version of the FUCCI cell cycle reporter was cloned into a lentiviral expression vector with a universal chromatin opening element (UCOE), an EF-1α promoter driving Cdt1 (1-100) C-terminal fused to mCherry, and a woodchuck hepatitis virus post-transcriptional regulatory element (WPRE). A four amino acid SGGS linker was used between mCherry and the Cdt1 fragment. This construct constitutes half of the FUCCI cell cycle reporter and has been reported to fluoresce red during G1 phase but is otherwise degraded by both SCF Skp2 and CUL4 Ddb1 E3 ubiquitin ligases.

Human (21792A) and chimpanzee (3624K) cells were infected with the Cdt1 reporter. At day 5 post-infection, polyclonal populations of cells expressing the Cdt1 reporter were sorted based on mCherry expression on a Sony MA900. Reporter cells were then cross validated with the commercial CLICK-iT EdU cell cycle assay, with mCherry positive cells nearly all classified as G1 phase by the EdU assay (88%). Similarly, mCherry negative cells were nearly fully depleted from G1 phase (3%).

Next, Cdt1 reporter cells were infected with either an sgRNA targeting CDK2 or a non-targeting sgRNA control, with 25-40% of cells expression sgRNAs based on GFP expression. At day 4 post-infection, cells were seeded onto an Ibidi 4-well µ-Slide, with one well for each condition. On day 5 post-infection, cells were live imaged on a Nikon Ti automated inverted microscope with incubation enclosure for a period of 24.83 hours at an interval of 10 minutes across 38 stage positions.

Neural progenitor cell differentiation
Human (28126B) and chimpanzee (40280L) PSCs were differentiated into neural progenitor cells (NPCs). Differentiation media was made without ventral and caudalization patterning factors (sonic hedgehog agonist and GSK3i CHIR99021). PSCs were maintained on Matrigel prior to day 0 plating onto Lam-111 coated plates. Cells were seeded at 20,000 cells/cm^2, roughly twice the published density to ensure robust survival. NPCs were evaluated for purity at days 7-11 of differentiation with antibody staining against NPC markers Pax6 and Nestin. Cells were dissociated with Accutase, pelleted and washed, then fixed and permeabilized. Cells were evaluated by flow cytometry. In addition, NPCs were plated on µ-Slide 4 Well chambers, stained with antibodies against Pax6 and Nestin, and visualized by fluorescence microscopy.

Cerebral organoid differentiation
Human (H1) and Chimpanzee (8861G) cells were reverse transduced with lentiviral constructs containing sgRNAs targeting CDK2, CDK4, CCNE1, RBL1, ATP6AP1, ASPM, or a non-targeting sgRNA. An additional pair of human (23555A) and chimpanzee (40280L) organoids were transduced with lentiviral constructs containing sgRNAs targeting cell cycle factors CDK2, CDK4, CCNE1, RBL1, or a nontargeting sgRNA. 48 hours post-infection, cells expressing sgRNA were selected for via addition of 1.5 µg/ml puromycin. Cells were then recovered in normal growth media from 4 days post-infection to 6 days post-infection. At 6 days post-infection, each sgRNA condition was single cell dissociated with Accutase, counted, and seeded into an ultra low-attachment V-bottom 96 well plate. Four to twelve wells were seeded per condition with 10,000 cells seeded in 100 µl of Sasai Media #1.

Organoid formation was performed with the following modifications. On days 0-6, wnt inhibitor Wnt-C59 was added to promote patterning to telencephalon. 200 nM LDN-193189 was added to promote differentiation from days 0 through 18.

Cerebral organoid EdU staining
Human (H1, 20961B, 23555A) and Chimpanzee (8861G and 40280L) cells were reverse transduced with lentiviral constructs containing sgRNAs targeting CDK2 or a non-targeting sgRNA. 48 hours post-infection, cells expressing sgRNA were selected for via addition of 1.5 µg/ml puromycin. Only one day of puromycin selection was performed to maintain a sub-population (20-30%) of non-sgRNA expressing cells to enable co-culture analysis. Cells were then recovered in normal growth media from 3 days post-infection to 6 days post-infection. At 6 days post-infection, each sgRNA condition was dissociated to single cells with Accutase, counted, and seeded into an ultra low-attachment V-bottom 96 well plate. Twelve wells were seeded per replicate in each condition with 10,000 cells seeded in 100 µl of Sasai Media #1.

Organoids were collected on day 9 for cell cycle measurements to examine whether perturbations continue to influence cell cycle progression during NPC patterning and expansion. Organoids were incubated in 10 µM EdU with a fresh media change and cells were incubated for roughly 1 hour, after which organoids were dissociated with a pre-warmed solution of Papain mixed with DNase I. Cells were then pelleted and then directly fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 minutes at room temperature, protected from light. Cell cycle phase measurements were then performed as described above.

Orangutan CRISPRi growth comparison
CRISPRi machinery was engineered into orangutan PSCs at the AAVS1 locus. sgRNAs targeting CDK2, CDK4, CCNE1, ATP6AP1, KAT6A, and UFL1 were transduced into human (28126B), chimpanzee (40280L), and orangutan PSCs via lentivirus at MOI ~1. Cells were transduced in triplicate in 24-well plates and passaged every 2 days. At each passage, a portion of cells were quantified by flow cytometry. The fraction of sgRNA+ expressing cells was determined based on the fraction of BFP+ cells. Measurements were collected until day 10 for CDK2, CDK4, CCNE1, and ATP6AP1. Measurements were collected until day 14 for KAT6A and UFL1. In parallel, cells were transduced with sgRNAs targeting CDK2, CDK4, CCNE1, ATP6AP1, KAT6A, and UFL1 and expanded into a 6-well plate. 48h post-infection, cells were expanded in 2 µg/ml puromycin and allowed to recover for 48 hours. At day 5 post-infection, sgRNA+ cells were sorted based on BFP+ expression using a Sony MA900. RNA was extracted, cDNA was reverse transcribed, and qRT-PCR was used to quantify the degree of sgRNA-mediated depletion in biological triplicate.
