# Abstract
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are responsible for the majority of cellular responses to hormones and neurotransmitters as well as the senses of sight, olfaction and taste. The paradigm of GPCR signalling is the activation of a heterotrimeric GTP binding protein (G protein) by an agonist-occupied receptor. The β2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR) activation of Gs, the stimulatory G protein for adenylyl cyclase, has long been a model system for GPCR signalling. Here we present the crystal structure of the active state ternary complex composed of agonist-occupied monomeric β2AR and nucleotide-free Gs heterotrimer. The principal interactions between the β2AR and Gs involve the amino- and carboxy-terminal α-helices of Gs, with conformational changes propagating to the nucleotide-binding pocket. The largest conformational changes in the β2AR include a 14 Å outward movement at the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane segment 6 (TM6) and an α-helical extension of the cytoplasmic end of TM5. The most surprising observation is a major displacement of the α-helical domain of Gαs relative to the Ras-like GTPase domain. This crystal structure represents the first high-resolution view of transmembrane signalling by a GPCR.

# Introduction
The β2 adrenergic receptor (β2AR) has been a model system for the large and diverse family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) for over 40 years. It was one of the first GPCRs to be characterized by radioligand binding, and it was the first neurotransmitter receptor to be cloned and structurally determined by crystallography. The β2AR was initially identified based on its physiological and pharmacological properties, but it was not known if receptors and G proteins were separate entities, or parts of the same protein. Subsequent biochemical studies led to the isolation and purification of functional β2AR and Gs, the stimulatory G protein that activates adenylyl cyclase, and the reconstitution of this signalling complex in phospholipid vesicles. The cooperative interactions of β2AR and Gs observed in ligand binding assays formed the foundation of the ternary complex model of GPCR activation. In the ternary complex consisting of agonist, receptor and G protein, the affinity of the receptor for agonist is enhanced and the specificity of the G protein for guanine nucleotides changes in favour of GTP over GDP. The GPCR field has evolved markedly since these initial studies. Isolation of the genes and cDNAs for the β2AR and other GPCRs using protein sequencing and expression cloning led to the expansion of the family by homology cloning. More recently, sequencing of the human genome led to the identification of over 800 GPCR genes. Experimental tools for identifying protein-protein interactions and for expression and silencing of genes have revealed a complex network of cellular signalling and regulatory pathways including G protein-independent activation of cytosolic kinases. Nevertheless, the β2AR continues to be a relevant model for most aspects of GPCR pharmacology, signalling and regulation.

Notwithstanding the remarkable advances in this field, we still know relatively little about the structural basis for transmembrane signalling by GPCRs. The G protein cycle for the β2AR-Gs complex is well established. Agonist binding to the β2AR promotes interactions with GDP-bound Gs αβγ heterotrimer, leading to the exchange of GDP for GTP, and the functional dissociation of Gs into Gα-GTP and Gβγ subunits. The separate Gα-GTP and Gβγ subunits can modulate the activity of different cellular effectors (channels, kinases or other enzymes). The intrinsic GTPase activity of Gαs leads to hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and the reassociation of Gα-GDP and Gβγ subunits, and the termination of signalling. The active state of a GPCR can be defined as that conformation that couples to and stabilizes a nucleotide-free G protein. In this agonist-β2AR-Gs ternary complex, Gs has a higher affinity for GTP than GDP, and the β2AR has an approximately 100-fold higher affinity for agonists than does β2AR alone. In an effort to understand the structural basis for GPCR signalling, we crystallized the β2AR-Gs complex.

# Main
The first challenge for crystallogenesis was to prepare a stable β2AR-Gs complex in detergent solution. The β2AR and Gs couple efficiently in lipid bilayers, but not in detergents used to solubilize and purify these proteins. We found that a relatively stable β2AR-Gs complex could be prepared by mixing purified GDP-Gs (approximately 100 μM final concentration) with a molar excess of purified β2AR bound to a high affinity agonist (BI-167107, Boehringer Ingelheim) in dodecylmaltoside solution. Apyrase, a non-selective purine pyrophosphatase, was added to hydrolyse GDP released from Gs on forming a complex with the β2AR. Removal of GDP was essential because both GDP and GTP can disrupt the high-affinity interaction between β2AR and Gs. The complex was subsequently purified by sequential antibody affinity chromatography and size-exclusion chromatography. The stability of the complex was enhanced by exchanging it into a recently developed maltose neopentyl glycol detergent MNG-3. The complex could be incubated at room temperature for 24 h without any noticeable degradation; however, initial efforts to crystallize the complex using sparse matrix screens in detergent micelles, bicelles and lipidic cubic phase (LCP) failed.

To further assess the quality of the complex, we analysed the protein by single particle electron microscopy. The results confirmed that the complex was monodisperse, but revealed two potential problems for obtaining diffraction of quality crystals. First, the detergent used to stabilize the complex formed a large micelle, leaving little polar surface on the extracellular side of the β2AR-Gs complex for the formation of crystal lattice contacts. Our initial approach to this problem, which was to generate antibodies to the extracellular surface, was not successful. As an alternative approach, we replaced the unstructured amino terminus of the β2AR with T4 lysozyme (T4L). We previously used T4L to facilitate crystallogenesis of the inactive β2AR by inserting T4L between the cytoplasmic ends of TM5 and TM6. Several different amino-terminal fusion proteins were prepared and single particle electron microscopy was used to identify a fusion with a relatively fixed orientation of T4L in relation to the β2AR.

The second problem revealed by single particle electron microscopy analysis was increased variability in the positioning of the α-helical component of the Gαs subunit. Gαs consists of two domains, the Ras-like GTPase domain (GαsRas), which interacts with the β2AR and the Gβ subunit, and the α-helical domain (GαsAH). The interface of the two Gαs subdomains forms the nucleotide-binding pocket, and electron microscopy two-dimensional (2D) averages and three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions show that in the absence of guanine nucleotide, GαsAH has a variable position relative to the complex of T4L-β2AR-GαsRas-Gβγ.

We attributed the variable position of GαsAH to the empty nucleotide-binding pocket. However, as noted above both GDP and non-hydrolysable GTP analogues disrupt the β2AR-Gs complex. The addition of the pyrophosphate analogue phosphonoformate (foscarnet) led to a significant increase in stabilization of GαsAH as determined by electron microscopy analysis of the detergent-solubilized complex. Crystallization trials were carried out in LCP using a modified monolein (7.7 MAG) designed to accommodate the large hydrophilic component of the T4L-β2AR-Gs complex. Although we were able to obtain small crystals that diffracted to 7 Å, we were unable to improve their quality through the use of additives and other modifications.

In an effort to generate an antibody that would further stabilize the complex and facilitate crystallogenesis, we crosslinked β2AR and the Gs heterotrimer with a small, homobifunctional amine-reactive crosslinker and used this stabilized complex to immunize llamas. Llamas and other camelids produce antibodies devoid of light chains. The single domain antigen binding fragments of these heavy-chain-only antibodies, known as nanobodies, are small (15 kDa), rigid, and are easily cloned and expressed in Escherichia coli. We obtained a nanobody (Nb35) that binds to the complex and prevents dissociation of the complex by GTPγS. The T4L-β2AR-Gs-Nb35 complex was used to obtain crystals that grew to 250 μm in LCP (7.7 MAG) and diffracted to 2.9 Å. A 3.2 Å data set was obtained from 20 crystals and the structure was determined by molecular replacement.

The β2AR-Gs complex crystallized in primitive monoclinic space group P2₁, with a single complex in each asymmetric unit. Complexes are arrayed in alternating aqueous and lipidic layers with lattice contacts formed almost exclusively between soluble components of the complex, leaving receptor molecules suspended between G protein layers and widely separated from one another in the plane of the membrane. Extensive lattice contacts are formed among all the soluble proteins, probably accounting for the strong overall diffraction and remarkably clear electron density for the G protein. Nb35 and T4L facilitated crystal formation. Nb35 packs at the interface of the Gβ and Gα subunits, with the complementarity determining region (CDR) 1 interacting primarily with Gβ and a long CDR3 loop interacting with both Gβ and Gα subunits. The framework regions of Nb35 from one complex also interact with Gα subunits from two adjacent complexes. T4L is linked to the β2AR only through amino-terminal fusion, but packs against the amino terminus of the Gβ subunit of one complex, the carboxy terminus of the Gγ subunit of another complex, and the Gα subunit of yet another complex.

The β2AR-Gs structure provides the first high-resolution insight into the mechanism of signal transduction across the plasma membrane by a GPCR, and the structural basis for the functional properties of the ternary complex. The largest difference between the inactive and active structures is a 14 Å outward movement of TM6 when measured at the Cα carbon of E268. There is a smaller outward movement and extension of the cytoplasmic end of the TM5 helix by 7 residues. A stretch of 26 amino acids in the third intracellular loop (ICL3) is disordered. Another notable difference between inactive and active structures is the second intracellular loop (ICL2), which forms an extended loop in the inactive β2AR structure and an α-helix in the β2AR-Gs complex. This helix is also observed in the β2AR-Nb80 structure; however, it may not be a feature that is unique to the active state, because it is also observed in the inactive structure of the highly homologous avian β1AR.

The quality of the electron density maps for the β2AR is highest at the β2AR-GαsRas interface, and much weaker for the extracellular half. The extracellular half of the receptor is not stabilized by any packing interactions either laterally with adjacent receptors in the membrane or through the extracellular surface. Instead, the extracellular region is indirectly tethered to the well-packed soluble components by the amino-terminal fusion to T4 lysozyme. Given the flexible and dynamic nature of GPCRs, the absence of stabilizing packing interactions may lead to structural heterogeneity in the extracellular half of the receptor and, consequently, to the limited quality of the electron density maps. However, the overall structure of the β2AR in the T4L-β2AR-Gs complex is very similar to our recent active-state structure of β2AR stabilized by a G protein mimetic nanobody (Nb80). In the β2AR-Nb80 crystal, each receptor molecule has extensive packing interactions with adjacent receptors and the quality of the electron density maps for the agonist-bound β2AR in this complex is remarkably good for a 3.5 Å structure. Therefore, the β2AR-Nb80 structure allows us to confidently model BI-167107 here, and provide a more reliable view of the conformational rearrangements of amino acids around the ligand-binding pocket and between the ligand-binding pocket and the Gs-coupling interface.

The overall root mean square deviation between the β2AR components in the β2AR-Gs and β2AR-Nb80 structures is approximately 0.6 Å, and they differ most at the cytoplasmic ends of transmembrane helices 5 and 6 where they interact with the different proteins. The largest divergence is a 3 Å outward movement at the end of helix 6 in the β2AR-Gs complex. However, the differences between these two structures are very small at the level of the most highly conserved amino acids (E/DRY and NPxxY), which are located at the cytoplasmic ends of the transmembrane segments. These conserved sequences have been proposed to be important for activation or for maintaining the receptor in the inactive state. Of these residues, only Arg131 differs significantly between these two structures. In β2AR-Nb80 Arg131 interacts with Nb80, whereas in the β2AR-Gs structure Arg131 packs against Tyr 391 of Gαs. The high structural similarity is in agreement with the functional similarity of these two proteins. The β2AR-Nb80 complex shows the same high affinity for the agonist isoproterenol as does the β2AR-Gs complex, consistent with high structural homology around the ligand binding pocket.

The active state of the β2AR is stabilized by extensive interactions with GαsRas. There are no direct interactions with Gβ or Gγ subunits. The total buried surface of the β2AR-GαsRas interface is 2,576 Å² (1,300 Å² for GαsRas and 1,276 Å² for the β2AR). This interface is formed by ICL2, TM5 and TM6 of the β2AR, and by a 5-helix, the αNb1 junction, the top of the β3-strand, and the α4-helix of GαsRas. Some of the β2AR sequences involved in this interaction have been shown to have a role in G protein coupling; however, there is no clear consensus sequence for Gs-coupling specificity when these segments are aligned with other GPCRs. Perhaps this is not surprising considering that the β2AR also couples to Gi and that many GPCRs couple to more than one G protein isoform. Of the 21 amino acids of Gs that are within 4 Å of the β2AR, only five are identical between Gs and Gi, and all of these are in the carboxy-terminal α-helix. The structural basis for G protein coupling specificity must therefore involve more subtle features of the secondary and tertiary structure. Nevertheless, a noteworthy interaction involves Phe 139, which is located at the beginning of the ICL2 helix and sits in a hydrophobic pocket formed by Gαs His 41 at the beginning of the β1-strand, Val 217 at the start of the β3-strand and Phe 376, Cys 379, Arg 380 and Ile 383 in the α5-helix. The β2AR mutant F139A has severely impaired coupling to Gs. The residue corresponding to Phe 139 is a Phe or Leu on almost all Gs coupled receptors, but is more variable in GPCRs known to couple to other G proteins. Of interest, the ICL2 helix is stabilized by an interaction between Asp 130 of the conserved DRY sequence and Tyr 141 in the middle of the ICL2 helix. Tyr 141 has been shown to be a substrate for the insulin receptor tyrosine kinase; however, the functional significance of this phosphorylation is currently unknown.

The lack of direct interactions between the β2AR and Gβγ is somewhat unexpected given that a heterotrimer is required for efficient coupling to a GPCR. Whereas Gβ does not interact directly with the β2AR, it has an indirect but important role in coupling by stabilizing the amino-terminal α-helix of Gαs. Several models involving GPCR dimers propose that one of the protomers interacts predominantly with Gα while the other interacts with Gβγ. Consistent with these models, biochemical and biophysical evidence suggests that Gαi2 forms a stable complex with a LTB4 receptor dimer. Whereas the β2AR efficiently activates Gs as a monomer, extensive biochemical and biophysical evidence supports the existence of β2AR dimers or oligomers in living cells. Therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that in cell membranes one protomer of a β2AR dimer may interact with the Gβγ subunit.

The most surprising observation in the β2AR-Gs complex is the large displacement of the GαsAH relative to GαsRas (an approximately 127° rotation about the junction between the domains). GαsAH moves as a rigid body as shown by the alignment of β2AR-Gs with GαsAH from the crystal structure of Gαs-GTPγS. In the structure of Gαs-GTPγS, the nucleotide-binding pocket is formed by the interface between GαsRas and GαsAH. Guanine nucleotide binding stabilizes the interaction between these two domains. The loss of this stabilizing effect of guanine nucleotide binding is consistent with the high flexibility observed for GαsAH in single particle electron microscopy analysis of the detergent-solubilized complex. It is also in agreement with the increase in deuterium exchange at the interface between these two domains upon formation of the complex. Recently double electron-electron resonance (DEER) spectroscopy was used to document large (up to 20 Å) changes in distance between nitroxide probes positioned on the Ras and α-helical domains of Gi upon formation of a complex with light-activated rhodopsin. Finally, it has been shown that GαsRas and GαsAH can form a functional GTPase when expressed together as separate proteins. Therefore, it is perhaps not surprising that GαsAH is displaced relative to GαsRas; however, its location in this crystal structure most probably reflects only one of an ensemble of conformations that it can adopt under physiological conditions, but has been stabilized by crystal packing interactions.

A potential concern is that Nb35, which was used to facilitate crystallogenesis, may be responsible for the displacement of the GαsAH. However, Nb35, which binds at the interface between Gβ and GαsRas, would not be expected to interact with the GαsAH or interfere with its interactions with GαsRas. None of the Nb35 contacts on the Ras domain are involved in interactions with GαsAH on the basis of the crystal structure of Gαs-GTPγS (1AZT). Moreover, if we superimpose the structures of the Ras domains of Gαs-GTPγS (1AZT) and β2AR-Gs, there is no overlap between Nb35 and the α-helical domain of Gαs-GTPγS. Similarly, if we align the Gβ subunits of the Gi-GDP heterotrimer (1GP2) with that of β2AR-Gs, there is no overlap between Nb35 and the α-helical domain of Gi. This analysis is in agreement with single particle electron microscopy studies which provide further evidence that Nb35 does not disrupt interactions between GαsAH and GαsRas.

The conformational links between the β2AR and the nucleotide-binding pocket primarily involve the amino- and carboxy-terminal helices of Gαs. The largest difference is observed for the α5-helix, which is displaced 6 Å towards the receptor and rotated as the carboxy-terminal end projects into transmembrane core of the β2AR. Previous studies using a variety of approaches have demonstrated the important role of the α5-helix in GPCR-G protein interactions. Associated with movement of the α5-helix, the β6-α5 loop, which interacts with the guanine ring in the Gαs-GTPγS structure, is displaced outward, away from the nucleotide-binding pocket. The movement of the α5-helix is also associated with changes in interactions between this helix and the β6-strand, the αNb1 loop, and the α1-helix. The β1-strand forms another link between the β2AR and the nucleotide-binding pocket. The carboxy-terminal end of this strand changes conformation around Gly 47, and there are further changes in the β1-α1 loop (P-loop) that coordinates the β-phosphate in the GDP and GTP-bound forms. The observations in the crystal structure are in agreement with deuterium exchange experiments where there is enhanced deuterium exchange in the β1-strand and the amino-terminal end of the α5-helix upon formation of the nucleotide-free β2AR-Gs complex. The deuterium exchange-mass spectrometry (DXMS) studies provide additional insights into the dynamic nature of these conformational changes in Gs upon complex formation.

The structure of a GDP-bound Gs heterotrimer has not been determined, so it is not possible to directly compare the Gαs-Gβγ interface before and after formation of the β2AR-Gs complex. On the basis of the structure of the GDP-bound Gi heterotrimer, we do not observe large changes in interactions between GαsRas and Gβγ upon formation of the complex with β2AR. This is also consistent with deuterium exchange studies. As discussed above, Nb35 binds at the interface between GαsRas and Gβ; therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that Nb35 may influence the relative orientation of the GαsRas-Gβγ interface in the crystal structure.

Clues to the initial stages of complex formation may come from the recent active state structures of rhodopsin. Comparison of the active-state structure of β2AR in the β2AR-Gs complex with the recent structure of metarhodopsin II bound to a peptide representing the carboxy terminus of transducin shows that the conformational changes in TM5 and TM6 are smaller in metarhodopsin II, and the position of the carboxy-terminal α helix of transducin is tilted by approximately 30° relative to the position of the homologous region of Gs. These may represent fundamental differences in the receptor-G protein interactions between these two proteins, but given the conservation of the G-protein binding pocket, the changes more probably reflect the more extensive contacts formed with the intact G protein. The position of the transducin peptide in metarhodopsin II may represent the initial interaction between a GDP-bound G protein and a GPCR. We have attempted to reproduce a similar complex between the β2AR and a synthetic peptide representing the carboxy-terminal 20 amino acids of Gs, but did not observe any effect of this peptide on receptor function, possibly due to the solubility and behaviour of the peptide in solution. However, when the carboxy-terminal 20 amino acids of Gs are fused to the carboxy terminus of the β2AR, we observe a 27-fold increase in agonist affinity. This effect is only 3.5-fold smaller than the effect we observe on agonist binding affinity in the β2AR-Gs complex, and demonstrates that there is a functional interaction between the peptide and receptor that may represent an initial stage in β2AR-Gs complex formation. The first interaction of the β2AR with the Gs heterotrimer would require a movement of the carboxy terminus of the α5-helix away from the β6-strand to permit interactions with the β2AR.

# Methods
The β2AR-Gs complex was crystallized from β2AR and Gs protein expressed in insect cells. Crystallogenesis was aided by fusing T4 lysozyme to the amino terminus of the β2AR and the addition of a nanobody (Nb35) that binds at the interface between the Gα and Gβ subunits. Crystals were grown in a LCP using 7.7 MAG, a lipid that accommodates membrane proteins with larger hydrophilic surfaces. Diffraction data were measured at beamline 23ID-B of the Advanced Photon Source and the structure was solved by molecular replacement.

An amino-terminally fused T4 lysozyme-β2AR construct with β2AR truncated in position 365 (T4L-β2AR) was expressed in Sf9 insect cell cultures infected with recombinant baculovirus, and solubilized in n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM) according to methods described previously. A β2AR construct truncated after residue 365 (β2AR-365) was used for the majority of the analytical experiments. M1 Flag affinity chromatography served as the initial purification step followed by alprenolol-Sepharose chromatography for selection of functional receptor. A subsequent M1 Flag affinity chromatography step was used to exchange receptor-bound alprenolol for high-affinity agonist BI-167107. The agonist-bound receptor was eluted, dialysed against buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0.1% DDM and 10 μM BI-167107), treated with lambda phosphatase, and concentrated to approximately 50 mg ml⁻¹ with a 50 kDa molecular weight cut off (MWCO) Millipore concentrator. Prior to spin concentration, the β2AR-365 construct, but not T4L-β2AR, was treated with PNGaseF to remove amino-terminal amino-linked glycosylation.

Bovine Gαs short, His6-rat Gβ1 and bovine Gγ2 were expressed in HighFive insect cells grown in Insect Xpress serum-free media. Cultures were grown to a density of 1.5 million cells per ml and then infected with three separate Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis viruses each containing the gene for one of the G protein subunits at a 1:1 multiplicity of infection. After 40-48 h of incubation the infected cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 65 mM NaCl, 1.1 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EDTA, 1x PTT (35 μg ml⁻¹ phenylmethanesulphonyl fluoride, 32 μg ml⁻¹ tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone, 32 μg ml⁻¹ tosyl lysyl chloromethyl ketone), 1x LS (3.2 μg ml⁻¹ leupeptin and 3.2 μg ml⁻¹ soybean trypsin inhibitor), 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol (β-ME), and 10 μM GDP) per litre of culture volume. The suspension was pressurized with 600 p.s.i. N₂ for 40 min in a nitrogen cavitation bomb. After depressurization, the lysate was centrifuged to remove nuclei and unlysed cells, and then ultracentrifuged at 180,000 g for 40 min. The pelleted membranes were resuspended in wash buffer (50 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, 100 μM MgCl2, 1x PTT, 1x LS, 5 mM β-ME, 10 μM GDP) per litre culture volume using a Dounce homogenizer and centrifuged again at 180,000 g for 40 min.

The frozen membranes were thawed and diluted to a total protein concentration of 5 mg ml⁻¹ with fresh wash buffer. Sodium cholate detergent was added to the suspension at a final concentration of 1.0%, MgCl2 was added to a final concentration of 5 mM, and 0.05 mg of purified protein phosphatase 5 was added per litre of culture volume. The sample was stirred on ice for 40 min, and then centrifuged at 180,000 g for 40 min to remove insoluble debris. The supernatant was diluted fivefold with Ni-NTA load buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0, 363 mM NaCl, 1.25 mM MgCl2, 6.25 mM imidazole, 0.2% Anzergent 3-12, 1x PTT, 1x LS, 5 mM β-ME, 10 μM GDP). Ni-NTA resin pre-equilibrated in Ni-NTA wash buffer 1 was added and the sample was stirred on ice for 20 min. The resin was collected into a gravity column and washed with Ni-NTA wash buffer 1, Ni-NTA wash buffer 2, and Ni-NTA wash buffer 3. The protein was eluted with Ni-NTA elution buffer. Protein-containing fractions were pooled and MnCl2 was added to a final concentration of 100 μM. Purified lambda protein phosphatase was added per litre of culture volume and the eluate was incubated on ice with stirring for 30 min. The eluate was passed through a 0.22 μm filter and loaded directly onto a MonoQ column. Gs-containing fractions were concentrated and run on a Superdex 200 column.

Nanobody-35 (Nb35) was expressed in the periplasm of E. coli strain WK6, extracted, and purified by nickel affinity chromatography followed by ion-exchange chromatography. Selected Nb35 fractions were dialysed against buffer and concentrated to approximately 65 mg ml⁻¹.

Formation of a stable complex was accomplished by mixing Gs heterotrimer at approximately 100 μM concentration with BI-167107-bound T4L-β2AR (or β2AR-365) in molar excess (approximately 130 μM) and incubating for 3 h at room temperature. BI-167107 has a dissociation half-time of approximately 30 h, providing a higher degree of stabilization to the active G protein-bound receptor than other full agonists such as isoproterenol. To maintain the high-affinity nucleotide-free state of the complex, apyrase was added after 90 min to hydrolyse residual GDP released from Gαs upon binding to the receptor.

The β2AR-Gs complex was exchanged into MNG-3 detergent, which substantially stabilizes the complex. The complex was immobilized on M1 Flag resin and washed in buffer containing 0.2% MNG-3. To prevent cysteine bridge-mediated aggregation, TCEP was added. The final size exclusion chromatography procedure to separate excess free receptor from the β2AR-Gs complex was performed on a Superdex 200 column. Peak fractions were pooled and concentrated to approximately 90 mg ml⁻¹.

To increase the probability of obtaining crystals, we replaced the unstructured amino terminus with the globular protein T4 lysozyme (T4L). The construct used (T4L-β2AR) contained the cleavable signal sequence followed by the M1 Flag epitope, the TEV protease recognition sequence, bacteriophage T4 lysozyme, and a two residue alanine linker fused to the human β2AR sequence D29 through G365. The glycosylation site of the β2AR at N187 was mutated to Glu. M96 and M98 in the first extracellular loop were each replaced by Thr to increase expression level.

Llamas were immunized with the cross-linked β2AR-Gs-BI-167107 ternary complex. Nanobodies Nb35 and Nb37 were selected for further characterization because they bind the β2AR-Gs-BI-167107 ternary complex but not the free receptor.

BI-167107 bound T4L-β2AR-Gs complex and Nb35 were mixed in 1:1.2 molar ratio. The mixture was mixed with 7.7 MAG containing 10% cholesterol in 1:1 protein solution to lipid ratio using the twin-syringe mixing method. The concentration of T4L-β2AR-Gs-Nb35 complex in 7.7 MAG was approximately 25 mg ml⁻¹. Crystals were grown in PEG 400, MES, pH 6.5, potassium nitrate, foscarnet, TCEP, and BI-167107.

Diffraction data were measured at the Advanced Photon Source beamline 23 ID-B. A final data set was compiled using diffraction wedges from 20 crystals. The structure was solved by molecular replacement using Phaser. Search models used were: the β and γ subunits from a Gi heterotrimer, the Gsα Ras-like domain, the active-state β2AR, a β2AR-binding nanobody, T4 lysozyme, and the Gsα-helical domain. Refinement was performed in Phenix, BUSTER, and Coot, followed by CNS using the DEN method.

# Discussion
The β2AR-Gs complex crystal structure provides the first high-resolution view of transmembrane signalling for a GPCR. We now have a framework to design experiments to investigate the mechanism of complex formation, GTP binding and complex dissociation. Of particular interest will be studies designed to determine the functional significance of the large movement of GαsAH relative to GαsRas that is observed in the β2AR-Gs complex. A better understanding of the structural basis for G protein activation may provide new approaches for drug discovery. The high degree of structural homology within the ligand-binding pocket has posed challenges for developing highly selective drugs for specific GPCR targets. In contrast, there is relatively low homology at the interface between the β2AR and Gαs, so identifying sequence and structural features that define specificity for particular G proteins may enable the development of selective inhibitors of specific GPCR-G protein interactions.
