# Abstract
The presence of DNA in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells is a danger signal that triggers host immune responses such as the production of type I interferons. Cytosolic DNA induces interferons through the production of cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP-AMP, or cGAMP), which binds to and activates the adaptor protein STING. Through biochemical fractionation and quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified a cGAMP synthase (cGAS), which belongs to the nucleotidyltransferase family. Overexpression of cGAS activated the transcription factor IRF3 and induced interferon-β in a STING-dependent manner. Knockdown of cGAS inhibited IRF3 activation and interferon-β induction by DNA transfection or DNA virus infection. cGAS bound to DNA in the cytoplasm and catalyzed cGAMP synthesis. These results indicate that cGAS is a cytosolic DNA sensor that induces interferons by producing the second messenger cGAMP.

# Introduction
DNA was known to stimulate immune responses long before it was shown to be a genetic material, but the mechanism by which DNA functions as an immune stimulant remains poorly understood. Although DNA can stimulate the production of type I interferons in dendritic cells through binding to Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) in the endosome, it is still unclear how DNA in the cytosol induces interferon. In particular, the sensor that detects cytosolic DNA in the interferon pathway remains elusive. Although several proteins—including DAI, RNA polymerase III, IFI16, DDX41, and several other DNA helicases—have been suggested to function as the potential DNA sensors that induce interferon, no consensus has emerged.

# Main
**Purification and identification of cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS).** We showed that delivery of DNA to mammalian cells or cytosolic extracts triggered the production of cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), which bound to and activated STING, leading to the activation of the transcription factor IRF3 and induction of interferon-β (IFN-β). To identify the cGAMP synthase (cGAS), we fractionated cytosolic extracts (S100) from the murine fibrosarcoma cell line L929, which contains the cGAMP-synthesizing activity. This activity was assayed by incubating the column fractions with adenosine triphosphate and guanosine triphosphate (ATP and GTP) in the presence of herring testis DNA (HT-DNA). After digestion of the DNA with Benzonase (Novagen) and heating at 95°C to denature proteins, the heat-resistant supernatants that contained cGAMP were incubated with perfringolysin O (PFO)-permeabilized Raw264.7 cells (transformed mouse macrophages). cGAMP-induced IRF3 dimerization in these cells was analyzed by native gel electrophoresis. Using this assay, we carried out three independent routes of purification, each consisting of four steps of chromatography but differing in the columns or the order of the columns used. In particular, the third route included an affinity purification step using a biotinylated DNA oligo [a 45-base pair DNA known as immune stimulatory DNA (ISD)].

We estimated that we achieved a range of 8000- to 15,000-fold purification and 2 to 5% recovery of the activity from these routes of fractionation. However, in the last step of each of these purification routes, silver staining of the fractions did not reveal clear protein bands that copurified with the cGAS activity, which suggests that the abundance of the putative cGAS protein might be very low in L929 cytosolic extracts.

We developed a quantitative mass spectrometry strategy to identify a list of proteins that copurified with the cGAS activity at the last step of each purification route. We reasoned that the putative cGAS protein must copurify with its activity in all three purification routes, whereas most 'contaminating' proteins would not. Thus, from the last step of each purification route, we chose fractions that contained most of the cGAS activity (peak fractions) and adjacent fractions that contained very weak or no activity. The proteins in each fraction were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and identified by nano-liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS). The data were analyzed by label-free quantification using the MaxQuant software; the proteins that copurified with the cGAS activity are shown in a Venn diagram. Remarkably, although many proteins copurified with the cGAS activity in one or two purification routes, only three proteins copurified in all three routes. All three were putative uncharacterized proteins: E330016A19 (NCBI accession number NP_775562), Arf-GAP with dual PH domain-containing protein 2 (NP_742145), and signal recognition particle 9-kD protein (NP_036188). Among these, more than 24 unique peptides were identified in E330016A19, representing 41% coverage in this protein of 507 amino acids.

Bioinformatic analysis drew our attention to E330016A19, which exhibited structural and sequence homology to the catalytic domain of human oligoadenylate synthase (OAS1). In particular, E330016A19 contains a conserved Gly[Gly/Ser]x9-13[Glu/Asp]h[Glu/Asp]h motif, where x9-13 indicates 9 to 13 flanking residues consisting of any amino acid and h indicates a hydrophobic amino acid. This motif is found in the nucleotidyltransferase (NTase) family.

Besides OAS1, this family includes adenylate cyclase, polyadenylate polymerase, and DNA polymerases. The C terminus of E330016A19 contained a Mab21 (male abnormal 21) domain, which was first identified in the Caenorhabditis elegans protein Mab21. Sequence alignment revealed that the C-terminal NTase and Mab21 domains are highly conserved from zebrafish to human, whereas the N-terminal sequences are much less conserved. The human homolog of E330016A19, C6orf150 (also known as MB21D1), was recently identified as one of several positive hits in a screen for interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) whose overexpression inhibited viral replication. For clarity, and on the basis of evidence presented below, we propose to name the mouse protein E330016A19 as m-cGAS and the human homolog C6orf150 as h-cGAS.

Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) showed that the expression of m-cGAS was low in immortalized mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) but high in L929 cells, Raw264.7 cells, and bone marrow-derived macrophages. Similarly, the expression of h-cGAS RNA was very low in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells but high in the human monocytic cell line THP-1. Immunoblotting further confirmed that h-cGAS protein was expressed in THP-1 cells but not HEK293T cells (no mouse cGAS antibody is available yet). Thus, the expression levels of m-cGAS and h-cGAS in different cell lines correlated with the ability of these cells to produce cGAMP and induce IFN-β in response to cytosolic DNA.

**Catalysis by cGAS triggers type I interferon production.** Overexpression of m-cGAS in HEK293T, which lacks STING expression, did not induce IFN-β, whereas stable expression of STING in HEK293T cells rendered these cells highly competent in IFN-β induction by m-cGAS. Point mutations of the putative catalytic residues Gly 198 and Ser 199 to alanine abolished the ability of m-cGAS to induce IFN-β. These mutations, as well as mutations of the other putative catalytic residues Glu 211 and Asp 213 to alanine, also abrogated the ability of m-cGAS to induce IRF3 dimerization in HEK293T-STING cells.

The magnitude of IFN-β induction by cGAS was comparable to that induced by MAVS (an adaptor protein that functions downstream of the RNA sensor RIG-I) and was higher than that induced by other putative DNA sensors, including DAI, IFI16, and DDX41, by several orders of magnitude. To determine whether overexpression of cGAS and other putative DNA sensors led to the production of cGAMP in cells, we incubated supernatants from heat-treated cell extracts with PFO-permeabilized Raw264.7 cells, followed by measurement of IRF3 dimerization. Among all the proteins expressed in HEK293T-STING cells, only cGAS was capable of producing the cGAMP activity in the cells.

To test whether cGAS could synthesize cGAMP in vitro, we purified wild-type and mutant Flag-cGAS proteins from transfected HEK293T cells. Wild-type m-cGAS and h-cGAS, but not the catalytically inactive mutants of cGAS, were able to produce the cGAMP activity, which stimulated IRF3 dimerization in permeabilized Raw264.7 cells. We found that the in vitro activities of both m-cGAS and h-cGAS were dependent on the presence of HT-DNA. To test whether DNA enhances IFN-β induction by cGAS in cells, we transfected different amounts of cGAS expression plasmid, with or without HT-DNA, into HEK293T-STING cells. HT-DNA markedly enhanced IFN-β induction by low but not high doses of cGAS plasmid. It is possible that the transfected cGAS plasmid DNA activated the cGAS protein in the cells, resulting in IFN-β induction. In contrast to cGAS, IFI16 and DDX41 did not induce IFN-β even when HT-DNA was cotransfected.

**cGAS is required for IFN-β induction by DNA transfection and DNA virus infection.** We used two different pairs of small interfering RNA (siRNA) to knock down m-cGAS in L929 cells, and found that both siRNA oligos strongly inhibited IFN-β induction by HT-DNA; moreover, the degree of inhibition correlated with the efficiency of knocking down m-cGAS RNA. We also established two L929 cell lines stably expressing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) sequences that targeted distinct regions of m-cGAS. The ability of these cells to induce IFN-β in response to HT-DNA was severely compromised relative to another cell line expressing a control shRNA against green fluorescent protein (shGFP).

Expression of cGAS in the L929-sh-cGAS cells restored IFN-β induction. Expression of STING or MAVS in these cells or delivery of cGAMP to these cells also induced IFN-β. In contrast, expression of cGAS or delivery of cGAMP failed to induce IFN-β in L929-shSTING cells, whereas expression of STING or MAVS restored IFN-β induction in these cells. Quantitative RT-PCR analyses confirmed the specificity and efficiency of knocking down cGAS and STING in the L929 cell lines stably expressing the corresponding shRNAs. These results indicate that cGAS functions upstream of STING and is required for IFN-β induction by cytosolic DNA.

Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a DNA virus known to induce interferons through the activation of STING and IRF3. L929 cells expressing shRNA against m-cGAS, but not against GFP, were severely compromised in IRF3 dimerization in response to HSV-1 infection. In contrast, knockdown of cGAS did not affect IRF3 activation by Sendai virus, an RNA virus. To determine whether cGAS is required for the generation of cGAMP in cells, we transfected HT-DNA into L929-shGFP and L929-sh-cGAS cells or infected these cells with HSV-1, then prepared heat-resistant fractions that contained cGAMP, which was subsequently delivered to permeabilized Raw264.7 cells to measure IRF3 activation. Knockdown of cGAS largely abolished the cGAMP activity generated by DNA transfection or HSV-1 infection. Quantitative mass spectrometry using selective reaction monitoring (SRM) showed that the abundance of cGAMP induced by DNA transfection or HSV-1 infection was markedly reduced in L929 cells depleted of cGAS. Taken together, these results demonstrate that cGAS is essential for producing cGAMP and activating IRF3 in response to DNA transfection or HSV-1 infection.

To determine whether cGAS is important in the DNA sensing pathway in human cells, we established a THP-1 cell line stably expressing a shRNA targeting h-cGAS. The knockdown of h-cGAS strongly inhibited IFN-β induction by HT-DNA transfection or infection by vaccinia virus, another DNA virus, but not by Sendai virus. The knockdown of h-cGAS also inhibited IRF3 dimerization induced by HSV-1 infection in THP-1 cells. This result was further confirmed in another THP-1 cell line expressing a shRNA targeting a different region of h-cGAS. The strong and specific effects of multiple cGAS shRNA sequences in inhibiting DNA-induced IRF3 activation and IFN-β induction in both mouse and human cell lines demonstrate a key role of cGAS in the STING-dependent DNA sensing pathway.

**Recombinant cGAS protein catalyzes cGAMP synthesis from ATP and GTP in a DNA-dependent manner.** To test whether cGAS is sufficient to catalyze cGAMP synthesis, we expressed Flag-tagged h-cGAS in HEK293T cells and purified it to apparent homogeneity. In the presence of HT-DNA, purified cGAS protein catalyzed the production of cGAMP activity, which stimulated IRF3 dimerization in permeabilized Raw264.7 cells. Deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I) treatment abolished this activity. The cGAS activity was also stimulated by other DNAs, including poly(deoxyadenosine-deoxythymidine), poly(deoxyguanosine-deoxycytidine), and ISD, but not by the RNA poly(inosine-cytidine). The synthesis of cGAMP by cGAS required both ATP and GTP but did not require cytidine triphosphate (CTP) or uridine triphosphate (UTP). These results indicate that the cyclase activity of purified cGAS protein was stimulated by DNA but not by RNA.

We also expressed m-cGAS in Escherichia coli as a SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier protein) fusion protein. After purification, SUMO-m-cGAS generated the cGAMP activity in a DNA-dependent manner. However, after the SUMO tag was removed by a SUMO protease, the m-cGAS protein catalyzed cGAMP synthesis in a DNA-independent manner. The reason for this loss of DNA dependency is unclear but could be due to some conformational changes after SUMO removal. Titration experiments showed that recombinant cGAS protein at less than 1 nM led to detectable IRF3 dimerization, whereas the catalytically inactive mutant of cGAS failed to activate IRF3 even at high concentrations. To formally prove that cGAS catalyzes the synthesis of cGAMP, we analyzed the reaction products by nano-LC-MS using SRM. cGAMP was detected in a 60-min reaction containing purified cGAS, ATP, and GTP. The identity of cGAMP was further confirmed by ion fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID). The fragmentation pattern of cGAMP synthesized by purified cGAS revealed product ions whose mass/charge ratio (m/z) values matched those of chemically synthesized cGAMP. Collectively, these results demonstrate that purified cGAS catalyzes the synthesis of cGAMP from ATP and GTP.

**cGAS binds to DNA.** The stimulation of cGAS activity by DNA suggests that cGAS is a DNA sensor. Indeed, both GST (glutathione S-transferase) fused to the N terminus of m-cGAS (GST-m-cGAS) and GST-h-cGAS, but not GST-RIG-I N terminus [RIG-I(N)], were precipitated by biotinylated ISD. In contrast, biotinylated RNA did not bind cGAS. Deletion analyses showed that the h-cGAS N-terminal fragment containing residues 1 to 212, but not the C-terminal fragment (residues 213 to 522), bound to ISD. A longer C-terminal fragment containing residues 161 to 522 did bind to ISD, which suggests that the sequence 161 to 212 may be important for DNA binding. However, deletion of residues 161 to 212 from h-cGAS did not impair ISD binding, which suggests that cGAS contains another DNA binding domain at the N terminus. Indeed, the N-terminal fragment containing residues 1 to 160 also bound ISD. Thus, cGAS may contain two separate DNA binding domains at the N terminus. Our attempts to express the cGAS fragment containing residues 161 to 212 in E. coli or HEK293T cells have not been successful, so at present we do not know whether this sequence alone is sufficient to bind DNA. Nonetheless, it is clear that the N terminus of h-cGAS containing residues 1 to 212 is both necessary and sufficient to bind DNA.

Different deletion mutants of h-cGAS were overexpressed in HEK293T-STING cells to determine their ability to activate IRF3 and induce IFN-β and the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). The protein fragment containing residues 1 to 382, which lacks the C-terminal 140 residues including much of the Mab21 domain, failed to induce IFN-β or TNF-α or to activate IRF3, which suggests that an intact Mab21 domain is important for cGAS function. As expected, deletion of the N-terminal 212 residues (residues 213 to 522), which include part of the NTase domain, abolished the cGAS activity. An internal deletion of just four amino acids (Lys 171, Leu 172, Lys 173, and Leu 174) within the first helix of the NTase fold preceding the catalytic residues also destroyed the cGAS activity.

Deletion of the N-terminal 160 residues did not affect IRF3 activation or cytokine induction by cGAS. In vitro assay showed that this protein fragment (residues 161 to 522) still activated the IRF3 pathway in a DNA-dependent manner. Thus, the N-terminal 160 amino acids of h-cGAS, whose primary sequence is not highly conserved evolutionarily, appear to be largely dispensable for DNA binding and catalysis by cGAS. In contrast, the NTase and Mab21 domains are important for cGAS activity.

**cGAS is predominantly localized in the cytosol.** To determine whether cGAS is a cytosolic DNA sensor, we prepared cytosolic and nuclear extracts from THP-1 cells and analyzed the localization of endogenous h-cGAS by immunoblotting. h-cGAS was detected in the cytosolic extracts but was barely detectable in the nuclear extracts. The THP-1 extracts were further subjected to differential centrifugation to separate subcellular organelles from one another and from the cytosol. Similar amounts of h-cGAS were detected in S100 and in the pellet after 100,000 g centrifugation, which suggests that this protein is soluble in the cytoplasm but that a substantial fraction of the protein is associated with light vesicles or organelles. The cGAS protein was not detected in the pellet after 5000 g centrifugation, which contained mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as evidenced by the presence of VDAC and STING, respectively. cGAS was also not detectable in the pellet after 20,000 g centrifugation, which contained predominantly ER and heavy vesicles.

We also examined the localization of cGAS by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy of L929 cells stably expressing Flag-m-cGAS. The cGAS protein was distributed throughout the cytoplasm but could also be observed in the nuclear or perinuclear region. After the cells were transfected with Cyanine 3 (Cy3)-labeled ISD for 2 or 4 hours, punctate forms of cGAS were observed, and they overlapped with the DNA fluorescence. Such colocalization and apparent aggregation of cGAS and Cy3-ISD was observed in more than 50% of the cells under observation. These results, together with the biochemical evidence of direct binding of cGAS with DNA, suggest that cGAS binds to DNA in the cytoplasm.

# Discussion
We have developed a strategy that combines quantitative mass spectrometry with conventional protein purification to identify biologically active proteins partially purified from crude cell extracts. This strategy may be generally applicable to proteins that are difficult to purify to homogeneity because of very low abundance, labile activity, or scarce starting materials.

As a proof of principle, we used this strategy to identify the mouse protein E330016A19 as the enzyme that synthesizes cGAMP. This discovery led to the identification of a large family of cGAS that is conserved from fish to human, formally demonstrating that vertebrate animals contain evolutionarily conserved enzymes that synthesize cyclic dinucleotides, which were previously found only in bacteria, archaea, and protozoa. Vibrio cholerae can synthesize cGAMP through its cyclase DncV (VC0179), which contains an NTase domain but has no obvious primary sequence homology to the mammalian cGAS.

Our results not only demonstrate that cGAS is a cytosolic DNA sensor that triggers the type I interferon pathway, but also reveal a mechanism of immune signaling in which cGAS generates the second messenger cGAMP, which binds to and activates STING, thereby triggering type I interferon production. It remains to be determined whether STING evolved first to detect cyclic dinucleotides from bacteria, or to detect endogenous cGAMP in the host as a mechanism of responding to cytosolic DNA. Although STING can directly detect certain cyclic dinucleotides produced by some bacteria, the deployment of cGAS as a cytosolic DNA sensor greatly expands the repertoire of microorganisms detected by the host immune system. In principle, all microorganisms that can carry DNA into the host cytoplasm—such as DNA viruses, bacteria, parasites (e.g., malaria), and retroviruses (e.g., HIV)—could potentially trigger the cGAS-STING pathway. The enzymatic synthesis of cGAMP by cGAS provides a mechanism of signal amplification for a robust and sensitive immune response. However, the detection of self DNA in the host cytoplasm by cGAS could also lead to autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren's syndrome, and Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.

Several other DNA sensors, such as DAI, IFI16, and DDX41, have been reported to induce type I interferons. Overexpression of DAI, IFI16, or DDX41 did not lead to the production of cGAMP. We also found that knockdown of DDX41 and p204 (a mouse homolog of IFI16) by siRNA did not inhibit the generation of cGAMP activity in HT-DNA-transfected L929 cells. Nonetheless, it is possible that distinct DNA sensors exist in different cell types. Unlike other pattern recognition receptors (e.g., TLRs), cGAS is a cyclase that is likely more amenable to inhibition by small-molecule compounds. These inhibitors may be developed into therapeutic agents for the treatment of human autoimmune diseases.
