# Enzymatic Amplification of Beta-Globin Genomic Sequences and Restriction Site Analysis for Diagnosis of Sickle Cell Anemia

# Abstract
Two new methods were used to establish a rapid and highly sensitive prenatal diagnostic test for sickle cell anemia. The first involves the primer-mediated enzymatic amplification of specific beta-globin target sequences in genomic DNA, resulting in the exponential increase (220,000 times) of target DNA copies. In the second technique, the presence of the beta^A and beta^S alleles is determined by restriction endonuclease digestion of an end-labeled oligonucleotide probe hybridized in solution to the amplified beta-globin sequences. The beta-globin genotype can be determined in less than 1 day on samples containing significantly less than 1 microgram of genomic DNA.

# Introduction
Recent advances in recombinant DNA technology have made possible the molecular analysis and prenatal diagnosis of several human genetic diseases. Fetal DNA obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling can be analyzed by restriction enzyme digestion, with subsequent electrophoresis, Southern transfer, and specific hybridization to cloned gene or oligonucleotide probes. With polymorphic DNA markers linked genetically to a specific disease locus, segregation analysis must be carried out with restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) found to be informative by examining DNA from family members.

Many of the hemoglobinopathies, however, can be detected by more direct methods in which analysis of the fetus alone is sufficient for diagnosis. For example, the diagnosis of hydrops fetalis (homozygous alpha-thalassemia) can be made by documenting the absence of any alpha-globin genes by hybridization with an alpha-globin probe. Homozygosity for certain beta-thalassemia alleles can be determined in Southern transfer experiments by using oligonucleotide probes that form stable duplexes with the normal beta-globin gene sequence but form unstable hybrids with specific mutants.

Sickle cell anemia can also be diagnosed by direct analysis of fetal DNA. DNA obtained by amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling can be treated with a restriction endonuclease (for example, Dde I and Mst II) that recognizes a sequence altered by the S mutation. This generates beta^A- and beta^S-specific restriction fragments that can be resolved by Southern transfer and hybridization with a beta-globin probe. We have developed a procedure for the detection of the sickle cell mutation that is very rapid and is at least two orders of magnitude more sensitive than standard Southern blotting. There are two special features to this protocol. The first is a method for amplifying specific beta-globin DNA sequences with the use of oligonucleotide primers and DNA polymerase. The second is the analysis of the beta-globin genotype by solution hybridization of the amplified DNA with a specific oligonucleotide probe and subsequent digestion with a restriction endonuclease. These two techniques increase the speed and sensitivity, and lessen the complexity of prenatal diagnosis for sickle cell anemia; they may also be generally applicable to the diagnosis of other genetic diseases and in the use of DNA probes for infectious disease diagnosis.

# Main
Sequence amplification by polymerase chain reaction. We use a two-step procedure for determining the beta-globin genotype of human genomic DNA samples. First, a small portion of the beta-globin gene sequence spanning the polymorphic Dde I restriction site diagnostic of the beta^A allele is amplified. Next, the presence or absence of the Dde I restriction site in the amplified DNA sample is determined by solution hybridization with an end-labeled complementary oligomer followed by restriction endonuclease digestion, electrophoresis, and autoradiography.

The beta-globin gene segment was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) procedure in which we used two 20-base oligonucleotide primers that flank the region to be amplified. One primer, PC04, is complementary to the (+)-strand and the other, PC03, is complementary to the (-)-strand. The annealing of PC04 to the (+)-strand of denatured genomic DNA followed by extension with the Klenow fragment of Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I and deoxynucleotide triphosphates results in the synthesis of a (-)-strand fragment containing the target sequence. At the same time, a similar reaction occurs with PC03, creating a new (+)-strand. Since these newly synthesized DNA strands are themselves template for the PCR primers, repeated cycles of denaturation, primer annealing, and extension result in the exponential accumulation of the 110-base pair region defined by the primers.

An example of the degree of specific gene amplification achieved by the PCR method is shown. Samples of DNA (1 microgram) were amplified for 20 cycles and a fraction of each sample, equivalent to 36 ng of the original DNA, was subjected to alkaline gel electrophoresis and transferred to a nylon filter. The filter was then hybridized with a 32P-labeled 40-base oligonucleotide probe, RS06, which is complementary to the target sequence but not to the PCR primers. The results, after a 2-hour autoradiographic exposure, show that a fragment hybridizing with the RS06 probe migrates at the position expected of the amplified target DNA segment (110 bases). No hybridization with the RS06 probe could be detected in unamplified DNA. When PCR amplification was performed on a DNA sample derived from an individual with hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin in which both the delta- and beta-globin genes are deleted, again no 110-base fragment was detected. To estimate the yield and efficiency of 20 cycles of PCR amplification, we prepared a Southern blot that contained 36 ng of an amplified genomic DNA sample and a dilution series consisting of various amounts of cloned beta-globin sequence. The efficiency was calculated according to the formula: (1 + X)^n = Y, where X is the mean efficiency per cycle, n is the number of PCR cycles, and Y is the extent of amplification (yield) after n cycles (for example, a 200,000-fold increase after 20 cycles). The amounts of cloned beta-globin sequences used in this experiment were calculated to represent efficiencies of 70 to 100 percent.

The reconstructions were prepared by digesting the beta-globin plasmid, pBR328::beta^A, with the restriction enzymes Hae III and Mae I. Both of these enzymes cleave the beta-globin gene within or very near to the 20 base regions that hybridize to the PCR primers, generating a 103-base pair (bp) fragment that is almost identical in size and composition to the 110-bp segment created by PCR amplification. After hybridization with the RS06 probe and autoradiography, the amplified genomic sample was compared with the known standards, and the result indicated an overall efficiency of approximately 85 percent, representing an amplification of about 220,000 times (1.85^20).

Distinguishing the beta^A and beta^S alleles by the oligomer restriction method. We have previously described a rapid solution hybridization method that can indicate whether a genomic DNA sample contains a specific restriction enzyme site at, in principle, any chromosomal location. This method, called oligomer restriction (OR), involves the stringent hybridization of a 32P end-labeled oligonucleotide probe to the specific segment of the denatured genomic DNA which spans the target restriction site. The ability of a mismatch within the restriction site to prevent cleavage of the duplex formed between the probe and the target genomic sequence is the basis for detecting allelic variants. The presence of the restriction site in the target DNA is revealed by the appearance of a specific labeled fragment generated by cleavage of the probe.

For the diagnosis of sickle cell anemia, the probe was designed to be complementary to a region of the beta-globin gene locus surrounding the sixth codon. In the beta^A allele, the nucleotide (nt) sequence at this position contains a Dde I restriction site, but due to the single base mutation, this site is absent in the beta^S allele. Our strategy for generating specific probe cleavage products for each allele is based on the presence of an invariant Hinf I restriction enzyme site immediately adjacent to the polymorphic Dde I restriction site. Resolution of the labeled oligomer cleavage products produced by sequential digestion with Dde I and Hinf I allows us to distinguish between the two alleles. In an individual homozygous for the wild-type beta-globin allele AA, Dde I digestion will produce a labeled octamer (8 nt) from the probe. Because of its short length, the 8-nt cleavage product will dissociate from the genomic target DNA and the subsequent digestion with Hinf I has no effect. In the case of SS homozygotes, however, Dde I digestion does not cleave the probe since a base pair mismatch exists in the recognition sequence formed between the probe and target DNA. The invariant Hinf I site will then be cleaved during Hinf I digestion, releasing a labeled trimer (3 nt). In an AS heterozygote, both a trimer and an octamer would be detected. The resolution of the intact 40-base probe, the 8-nt and the 3-nt cleavage products is achieved by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Experiments testing the sequential digestion strategy with plasmids carrying the beta^A and beta^S alleles show that, in each case, the expected probe cleavage products were produced.

Analysis of genomic DNA samples by PCR and OR. Eleven DNA samples derived from lymphoblastoid cell lines or white blood cells were analyzed for their beta-globin genotype by standard Southern blotting and hybridization of the Mst II RFLP, identifying the genotypes of the samples as either AA, AS, or SS. Six of these samples (and one additional one) were then amplified by PCR for 20 cycles starting with 1 microgram of DNA each. An aliquot of the amplified DNA sample (one-fourteenth of the original 1 microgram sample) was hybridized to the RS06 probe and digested with Dde I and then Hinf I. A portion (one-tenth) of this oligomer restriction reaction was analyzed on a polyacrylamide gel to resolve the cleavage products. The high sensitivity achieved with the PCR and OR method is demonstrated by the strength of the autoradiographic signal derived from only 1/140 of the original 1 microgram sample (7 ng). Each sample determined to be AA by RFLP analysis showed a strong 8-nt fragment while those typed as SS showed a strong 3-nt fragment. Analysis of the known AS samples revealed both cleavage products.

In the analysis of the AA samples, a faint 3-nt could be detected in addition to the primary 8-nt signal. The reasons for this band remain unclear, although incomplete Dde I cleavage or the occasional failure of the 8-nt fragment to disassociate from the target DNA may contribute to the nonspecific 3-nt product generated by Hinf I digestion. In the analysis of the SS samples, a very faint 8-nt band was also observed in addition to the expected 3-nt signal. We have determined that the background 8-nt product detected in SS samples can be attributed to the delta-globin gene, which is highly homologous to beta-globin. We hypothesized that the faint 8-nt signal observed in the SS samples was due to some amplification of the delta-globin gene by these primers and the subsequent cross-hybridization of the amplified delta sequences with the RS06 probe used in the OR procedure. Delta-globin has the same Dde I site as normal beta-globin, and the duplex formed between an amplified delta gene segment and the RS06 probe would be expected to yield an 8-nt fragment on Dde I digestion even though there are sequence differences (four mismatches out of 40 bases) between RS06 and delta-globin. It is likely that delta-globin sequences may be amplified to some extent and detected weakly with the RS06 probe in all DNA samples, but that its contribution to the total signal is very small and detectable only when the sample is SS and no 8-nt fragment from the beta-globin gene is expected. We tested this hypothesis by treating an SS DNA sample before amplification with the enzyme Mbo I. Since there is a recognition site for this enzyme in the target DNA of the delta- but not the beta-globin gene, this treatment would prevent amplification of the delta segment.

Effect of PCR cycle number on detection threshold. The strength of the autoradiograph signal detected by OR as a function of PCR cycle number and autoradiographic exposure was examined. The signal intensity after 20 cycles is at least 20 times as strong as that for 15 cycles and the determination of the beta-globin genotype can be made with an autoradiographic exposure for only 2 hours. The observed increase of >20-fold is consistent with our estimates of 85 percent efficiency per cycle. Coupled with the time that it takes to actually carry out the PCR and OR procedures, a 20-cycle PCR allows a diagnosis to be made in less than 10 hours with a DNA sample of 1 microgram.

Since all of the previous PCR experiments were done with 1 microgram of genomic DNA, we explored the effect of using significantly smaller amounts of DNA as template for PCR amplification. The results obtained with 20 cycles of PCR amplification on 500, 100, 20, and 4 ng of DNA from an AS individual are shown. After analysis of 1/40 of each sample by the OR procedure and a 20-hour autoradiographic exposure, the beta-globin genotype could be easily determined on DNA samples of 20 ng or about 100 times less than is needed for a typical Southern transfer and hybridization experiment. In this experiment, only a small fraction (1/40) of the starting material was placed on the gel; therefore it should be possible to analyze samples of less than 20 ng of genomic DNA (20 ng is equivalent to approximately 6000 haploid genomes) if a larger proportion of the material was utilized in the OR and gel electrophoresis steps.

# Discussion
Diagnostic applications of the PCR-OR system. When currently available methods are used, the completion of a prenatal diagnosis for sickle cell anemia takes a period of several days after the DNA is isolated. With 1 microgram of genomic DNA, the beta-globin genotype can be determined by the PCR-OR method in less than 10 hours; 20 cycles of amplification requires about 2 hours (each full cycle takes 6 to 7 minutes in our protocol), the oligomer restriction procedure involving liquid hybridization and enzyme digestions require an additional 2 hours, and the electrophoresis takes about an hour. Autoradiographic exposure for 4 hours is sufficient to generate a strong signal.

Because this method includes a liquid hybridization protocol and involves the serial addition of reagents to a single tube, it is simpler to perform than the standard Southern transfer and hybridization procedure. Prior to electrophoresis, all of the reactions can be done in two small microcentrifuge tubes and could readily be automated. The sensitivity, as well as the speed and simplicity, of this procedure is also important for clinical applications. Twenty nanograms of starting material can provide an easily detectable result in an overnight autoradiographic exposure. This sensitivity makes the PCR-OR method particularly valuable in cases where poor DNA yields are obtained from prenatal samples. In addition, DNA samples of poor quality (very low average molecular weight) can give excellent results in the PCR-OR protocol.

The PCR method is likely to be generally applicable for specific gene amplification since a fragment encoding a portion of the HLA-DQalpha locus has recently been amplified with this procedure. We have carried out PCR amplification on a 110-bp beta-globin sequence with an overall efficiency per cycle of about 85 percent. We have also amplified longer beta-globin fragments (up to 267 bp), but the yield was lower under our standard conditions. Efficient amplification of a 267-bp fragment required some variation in the PCR procedure. In principle, increasing the number of PCR cycles should yield even greater amplification than that reported here (~220,000-fold after 20 cycles).

Our method for the diagnosis of sickle cell anemia involves the coupling of the PCR procedure with that of oligomer restriction. It was designed to distinguish between two alleles that differ by a polymorphic restriction site. The PCR-OR method is applicable as well to the diagnosis of other diseases where the lesion directly affects a restriction enzyme site or where the polymorphic site is in strong linkage disequilibrium with the disease causing locus. If the polymorphism is in linkage equilibrium with the disease, PCR-OR requires family studies to follow the inheritance of the disease locus. In the case of the beta-globin locus, the presence of the invariant Hinf I restriction site adjacent to the polymorphic Dde I site allows a sequential digestion procedure to identify both the beta^A and beta^S alleles. In principle, this approach does not require that the two sites be immediately adjacent but only that the cleavage product generated by digestion at the polymorphic site dissociate from the target to prevent cutting at the invariant site. Since the restriction enzyme digestion conditions used here are fairly stringent for hybridization, we estimate that the polymorphic and invariant sites could perhaps be separated by as much as 20 bp.

The application of the PCR method to prenatal diagnosis does not necessarily depend on a polymorphic restriction site or on the use of radioactive probes. In fact, the significant amplification of target sequences achieved by the PCR method allows the use of nonisotopically labeled probes. Amplified target sequences could also be analyzed by a number of other procedures including those involving the hybridization of small labeled oligomers which will form stable duplexes only if perfectly matched and the recently reported method based on the electrophoretic shifts of duplexes with base pair mismatches. The ability of the PCR procedure to amplify a target DNA segment in genomic DNA raises the possibility that its use may extend beyond that of prenatal diagnosis to other areas of molecular biology.
