# Abstract

Nonapoptotic forms of cell death may facilitate the selective elimination of some tumor cells or be activated in specific pathological states. The oncogenic RAS-selective lethal small molecule erastin triggers a unique iron-dependent form of nonapoptotic cell death that we term ferroptosis. Ferroptosis is dependent upon intracellular iron, but not other metals, and is morphologically, biochemically, and genetically distinct from apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagy. We identify the small molecule ferrostatin-1 as a potent inhibitor of ferroptosis in cancer cells and glutamate-induced cell death in organotypic rat brain slices, suggesting similarities between these two processes. Indeed, erastin, like glutamate, inhibits cystine uptake by the cystine/glutamate antiporter (system xc-), creating a void in the antioxidant defenses of the cell and ultimately leading to iron-dependent, oxidative death. Thus, activation of ferroptosis results in the nonapoptotic destruction of certain cancer cells, whereas inhibition of this process may protect organisms from neurodegeneration.

# Introduction

Cell death is crucial for normal development, homeostasis, and the prevention of hyperproliferative diseases such as cancer. It was once thought that almost all regulated cell death in mammalian cells resulted from the activation of caspase-dependent apoptosis. More recently, this view has been challenged by the discovery of several regulated nonapoptotic cell death pathways activated in specific disease states, including poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) and apoptosis-inducing factor 1 (AIF1)-dependent parthanatos, caspase-1-dependent pyroptosis, and receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIPK1)-dependent necroptosis. We hypothesized that additional regulated forms of nonapoptotic cell death likely remain to be discovered that mediate cell death in other developmental or pathological circumstances.

The RAS family of small GTPases (HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS) are mutated in ~30% of all cancers. Finding compounds that are selectively lethal to RAS mutant tumor cells is therefore a high priority. We previously identified two structurally unrelated small molecules, named erastin and RSL3, that were selectively lethal to oncogenic RAS mutant cell lines and that we refer to together as RAS-selective lethal (RSL) compounds. Using affinity purification, we identified voltage-dependent anion channels 2 and 3 (VDAC2/3) as direct targets of erastin, but not RSL3. Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) and complementary DNA (cDNA) overexpression studies demonstrated that VDAC2 and VDAC3 are necessary, but not sufficient, for erastin-induced death, indicating that additional unknown targets are required for this process.

The type of cell death activated by the RSLs has been enigmatic. Classic features of apoptosis, such as mitochondrial cytochrome c release, caspase activation, and chromatin fragmentation, are not observed in RSL-treated cells. RSL-induced death is, however, associated with increased levels of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) and is prevented by iron chelation or genetic inhibition of cellular iron uptake. In a recent systematic study of various mechanistically unique lethal compounds, the prevention of cell death by iron chelation was a rare phenomenon, suggesting that few triggers can access iron-dependent lethal mechanisms.

We have explored the hypothesis that RSLs such as erastin activate a lethal pathway that is different from apoptosis, necrosis, and other well-characterized types of regulated cell death. We find that erastin-induced death involves a unique constellation of morphological, biochemical, and genetic features, which led us to propose the name ferroptosis as a description for this phenotype. We identified a specific small-molecule inhibitor of ferroptosis (ferrostatin-1) that prevents ferroptosis in cancer cells, as well as glutamate-induced cell death in postnatal rat brain slices. Our results suggest an underlying similarity between diverse forms of iron-dependent, nonapoptotic death and that the manipulation of ferroptosis may be exploited to selectively destroy RAS mutant tumor cells or to preserve neuronal cells exposed to specific oxidative conditions.

# Main

## Erastin Triggers Oxidative, Iron-Dependent Cell Death
RSL-induced cell death is a poorly characterized process involving the accumulation of ROS derived from an unknown source and the inhibition of cell death by iron chelation. We observed that these two processes were linked. Treatment of NRAS mutant HT-1080 fibrosarcoma cells with the RSL molecule erastin (10 µM) resulted in a time-dependent increase in cytosolic and lipid ROS beginning at 2 hr, as assayed by flow cytometry using the fluorescent probes H2DCFDA and C11-BODIPY, respectively. This increase in ROS preceded cell detachment and overt death, which began at 6 hr. ROS accumulation and cell death were suppressed by cotreatment with the iron chelator deferoxamine (DFO, 100 µM), whereas incubation with three different exogenous sources of iron, but not with other divalent transition metal ions (Cu2+, Mn2+, Ni2+, and Co2+), potentiated erastin-induced death. As cell death occurred in erastin-treated cells following a prolonged period of ROS accumulation and was suppressed by antioxidants, our data suggest that the overwhelming, iron-dependent accumulation of ROS is what kills these cells.

Because two erastin targets, VDAC2 and VDAC3, reside in the mitochondria, we hypothesized that erastin-induced death involved aberrant ROS production by the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC). However, in erastin-treated (10 µM, 6 hr) HT-1080 cells, we observed no increase in MitoSOX-sensitive mitochondrial ROS production. The ETC complex I inhibitor rotenone (250 nM, 6 hr) enhanced MitoSOX-sensitive ROS production but in a manner that was insensitive to DFO. Furthermore, KRAS mutant 143B osteosarcoma cells incapable of ETC-dependent ROS formation, due to the depletion of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded transcripts (rho0 cells), were as sensitive to erastin and RSL3 as matched mtDNA-wild-type (rho+) cells. Thus, erastin-induced cell death in human cancer cells involves DFO-sensitive ROS accumulation and can occur in cells lacking a functional mitochondrial ETC.

## Ferroptosis Is Distinct from Known Forms of Cell Death
We examined whether ferroptosis shared morphological, bioenergetic, or other similarities with apoptotic or necrotic death or with autophagy. Using transmission electron microscopy, we observed that HRAS mutant BJeLR-engineered tumor cells treated with erastin exhibited none of the characteristic morphologic features associated with staurosporine (STS)-induced apoptosis (e.g., chromatin condensation and margination), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)-induced necrosis (e.g., cytoplasmic and organelle swelling, plasma membrane rupture), or rapamycin-induced autophagy (e.g., formation of double-membrane enclosed vesicles). The lone distinctive morphological feature of erastin-treated cells involved mitochondria that appeared smaller than normal with increased membrane density, consistent with our previous report. With respect to bioenergetics, we observed substantial depletion of intracellular ATP in BJeLR and HT-1080 cells treated with H2O2, but not erastin, STS, or rapamycin, distinguishing ferroptosis from various forms of necrosis that involve bioenergetic failure.

Using a variation of our recently reported modulatory profiling strategy, we tested the ability of 12 established small-molecule cell death inhibitors to prevent ferroptosis in HT-1080 cells, BJeLR cells, and KRAS mutant Calu-1 non-small cell lung cancer cells. We computed the modulatory effect (Me) for each inhibitor (tested in a 10 point, 4-fold dilution series) on the normalized viability of cells treated with a lethal dose of erastin (Me < 0, death sensitization; Me = 0, no effect; Me > 0, death rescue). The resulting values were clustered hierarchically in an unsupervised fashion and displayed as a heat map. Using this approach, we observed that erastin-induced death was not consistently modulated by inhibitors of caspase, cathepsin, or calpain proteases (z-VAD-fmk, E64d, or ALLN); RIPK1 (necrostatin-1); cyclophilin D (cyclosporin A); or lysosomal function/autophagy (bafilomycin A1, 3-methyladenine, chloroquine), which are compounds known to inhibit forms of apoptosis, necrosis, and autophagic cell death.

DFO, the antioxidant trolox, the MEK inhibitor U0126, and, to a weaker extent, the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX), all rescued from erastin-induced death in HT-1080, BJeLR, and Calu-1 cells. These inhibitors were also effective at preventing erastin-induced ferroptosis in both wild-type and apoptosis-deficient Bax/Bak double knockout (DKO) mouse embryonic fibroblasts, indicating that ferroptosis can be activated in human-derived and mouse-derived cells and is independent of the core apoptotic machinery regulated by Bax and Bak. DFO, trolox, and U0126 all prevented the accumulation of H2DCFDA-sensitive ROS in erastin-treated HT-1080 cells, demonstrating that these inhibitors act to prevent death upstream or at the level of ROS production. Because trolox, U0126, and the membrane-permeable iron chelator 2,2-bipyridyl could be added to HT-1080 cells up to 6 hr after erastin and still confer substantial protection from death, ferroptosis likely requires continuous iron-dependent ROS formation over an extended period of time to trigger death.

Finally, in a modulatory profiling experiment that tested the ability of DFO, trolox, U0126, CHX, the membrane-permeable iron chelator ciclopirox olamine (CPX), and the glutathione peroxidase mimetic ebselen (Ebs) to modulate the lethality of erastin, RSL3, or 16 other mechanistically distinct lethal compounds thought to kill cells through various ROS-dependent and ROS-independent mechanisms, we observed that erastin and RSL3 formed a distinct cluster that was separate from all other inducers of cell death. Together, these data support the hypothesis that RSL-induced ferroptosis is distinct from apoptosis, various forms of necrosis, and autophagy.

## Ferroptosis Is Regulated by a Distinct Set of Genes
To explore the genetic basis of ferroptosis, we sought to identify genes uniquely required for this process. We focused on the potential role of the mitochondria, as this organelle displayed an aberrant morphology in erastin-treated cells. Mitochondrial gene function was perturbed using a custom arrayed shRNA library targeting 1,087 genes (median 5 hairpins/gene), most of which (901, 88%) encode predicted mitochondrial proteins. Using this library, we first compared the genetic suppressibility of erastin (7.3 µM)-induced ferroptosis and STS (1 µM)-induced apoptosis in Calu-1 cells. Across all 5,817 informative hairpins, we observed no significant correlation between those shRNAs that rescued from erastin-induced ferroptosis and those that rescued from STS-induced apoptosis, confirming that distinct genetic networks govern erastin-induced ferroptosis and STS-induced apoptosis.

Next, we performed a second erastin resistance screen in HT-1080 cells and, by using a rigorous confirmation pipeline, identified six high-confidence genes supported by at least two independent shRNAs per gene that are required for erastin-induced ferroptosis in both HT-1080 and Calu-1 cells: ribosomal protein L8 (RPL8), iron response element binding protein 2 (IREB2), ATP synthase F0 complex subunit C3 (ATP5G3), citrate synthase (CS), tetratricopeptide repeat domain 35 (TTC35), and acyl-CoA synthetase family member 2 (ACSF2). Consistent with the established CHX- and DFO-sensitive nature of erastin-induced ferroptosis, RPL8 encodes a component of the 60S ribosomal subunit presumably required for translation, and IREB2 encodes a master regulator of iron metabolism. We further validated these results, showing that shRNA-mediated silencing of IREB2 and the IREB2 negative regulator FBXL5 resulted in reciprocal changes in the expression of the known iron uptake, metabolism, and storage genes TFRC, ISCU, FTH1, and FTL and in erastin sensitivity. These results provide confidence in the quality of the screening and confirmation procedures.

To establish the generalizability of the results obtained in HT-1080 and Calu-1 cells, we tested the effects of silencing these genes in HT-1080, Calu-1, and six additional cell lines treated with erastin. Silencing of these six high-confidence genes by using the most effective hairpin for each gene conferred >=20% rescue in 79% of shRNA by cell line combinations. Thus, these genes appear to be broadly required for erastin-induced ferroptosis. We next tested whether silencing of these genes specifically attenuated erastin-induced ferroptosis or more broadly modulated a variety of lethal effects. Silencing of these six genes conferred protection against erastin-induced ferroptosis (>=40% rescue for 6/6 hairpins), but not cell death/cytostasis induced by STS, rotenone, rapamycin, the proteasome inhibitor MG132, the DNA-damaging agent camptothecin, or the Ca2+-dependent ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin (>=40% rescue for 0/6 hairpins). Together, these data support the hypothesis that a unique genetic network governs erastin-induced ferroptosis compared to other forms of cell death.

Both ACSF2 and CS are implicated in the regulation of mitochondrial fatty acid metabolism, and we wondered whether this process could contribute to ferroptosis. In cancer cells, fatty acid synthesis is in part dependent upon the metabolism of glutamine (Gln) to alpha-ketoglutarate, a process that can be inhibited by the small-molecule transaminase inhibitor aminooxyacetic acid (AOA). In cell culture media containing both glucose and Gln, we found that AOA (2 mM) rescued both HT-1080 and BJeLR cells from erastin-induced ferroptosis, mimicking the effects of silencing CS and ACSF2. In AOA-treated HT-1080 cells, the lethality of erastin was restored by coincubation with dimethyl alpha-ketoglutarate (DMK), which provides the downstream metabolite whose production from Gln is blocked by AOA. Dichloroacetic acid (DCA), an unrelated modulator of mitochondrial function not predicted to directly affect Gln metabolism, had no effect on erastin-induced ferroptosis. These results suggest that a Gln-, CS-, and ACSF2-dependent lipid synthesis pathway could supply a specific lipid precursor required for ferroptosis.

## Identification of Ferrostatin-1 as a Small-Molecule Inhibitor of Ferroptosis
One ultimate aim is to investigate the potential role of ferroptosis in vivo, and we therefore sought to identify a potent and specific drug-like small-molecule inhibitor of this process. To overcome the inherent limitations of many individual small-molecule collections, we assembled a custom screening library of 9,517 small molecules derived from a starting pool of 3,372,615 commercially available compounds that were filtered in silico on the basis of drug likeness, solubility, scaffold diversity, and other parameters. Screening of this lead-optimized compound (LOC) library and subsequent confirmation studies identified a compound that we named ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) as the most potent inhibitor of erastin-induced ferroptosis in HT-1080 cells (EC50 = 60 nM). To our knowledge, the activity for Fer-1 has not previously been reported in any biological system. We performed a total synthesis of Fer-1 and used this material to confirm the activity of Fer-1 and demonstrate that it specifically inhibited RSL-induced death, but not cell death induced by other oxidative lethal compounds and apoptosis-inducing agents.

We next sought to define the Fer-1 mechanism of action. Fer-1 did not inhibit extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) phosphorylation or arrest the proliferation of HT-1080 cells, suggesting that it does not inhibit the MEK/ERK pathway, chelate iron, or inhibit protein synthesis. Fer-1 did, however, prevent erastin-induced accumulation of cytosolic and lipid ROS. Moreover, similar to the positive control antioxidant trolox, Fer-1 readily oxidized the stable radical 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) under cell-free conditions, a test of intrinsic antioxidant potential. Substitution of the primary aromatic amine for a nitro group (SRS8-24) or elimination of the N-cyclohexyl moiety (CA-1) destroyed the antioxidant capability of Fer-1 as well as its ability to prevent erastin (10 µM)-induced death in HT-1080 cells. Thus, both aromatic amines are required for Fer-1 to prevent RSL-induced death, a function plausibly linked to its ability to scavenge free radicals.

Our results suggested that lipid ROS were crucial for erastin-induced death. We therefore hypothesized that Fer-1 was a lipid ROS scavenger, with the N-cyclohexyl moiety serving as a lipophilic anchor within biological membranes. Consistent with this hypothesis, in a series of ten Fer-1 analogs in which the number of carbons in the N-substituted cyclic moiety was systematically varied, we observed a significant correlation between the predicted lipophilicity (octanol-water partition coefficient, log P) and the erastin-death-suppressing ability of each molecule. Of note, SRS8-72, a Fer-1 analog with N-cyclopropyl in place of N-cyclohexyl, which was an order of magnitude less potent than Fer-1 at preventing death, nonetheless retained equivalent intrinsic antioxidant capability in the cell-free DPPH assay. Thus, the N-cyclohexyl moiety likely enables Fer-1 to prevent ferroptosis by promoting the tethering of Fer-1 within lipid membranes, as opposed to influencing the intrinsic antioxidant potential of this molecule.

Intriguingly, lipid partitioning alone does not appear to be sufficient to account for the potency of Fer-1. Fer-1 has similar predicted lipophilicity but much greater erastin-suppressing potency than two canonical lipophilic antioxidants (trolox and butylated hydroxyltoluene [BHT]) while being both considerably more lipophilic and more potent than two representative soluble antioxidants (Tiron and TEMPO). Both trolox and BHT are phenolic antioxidants, whereas Fer-1 contains an aromatic amine. We hypothesize that this difference may confer a unique profile of radical reactivity upon Fer-1 that is better tuned to the RSL mechanism.

## Fer-1 Prevents Glutamate-Induced Neurotoxicity
Excitotoxic cell death that occurs in the nervous system in epilepsy, stroke, and other trauma situations has been described as an oxidative, iron-dependent process. We hypothesized that excitotoxic death could be related to erastin-induced ferroptosis. We tested this hypothesis by using a rat organotypic hippocampal slice culture (OHSC) model that closely resembles the hippocampus in vivo by preserving the integrity of neuronal connections, both inhibitory and excitatory, and their supporting cells, including astrocytes and microglia. OHSCs have proven to be ideal complex preparations for lead compound identification and validation, capable of predicting in vivo efficacy.

OHSCs were treated with a lethal excitotoxic stimulus (5 mM L-glutamate, 3 hr) that mimics the consequences of stroke and neurodegenerative disease. These slices were coincubated with glutamate and vehicle alone or with glutamate plus Fer-1 (2 µM), the iron chelator CPX (5 µM), or, as a positive control, the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist MK-801 (10 µM). We analyzed the effects of these compound treatments on propidium iodide (PI) uptake as an indicator of cell death 24 hr following the end of glutamate treatment in three defined regions of the OHSCs: the dentate gyrus (DG), the CA1, and the CA3 fields of the hippocampus. A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) suggested significant differences for both brain region and compound treatment factors. Focusing on the compound treatment effect, Bonferroni posttests indicated that glutamate induced significant cell death in all three regions of the brain and that this death was attenuated significantly and to an almost identical extent by cotreatment with Fer-1, CPX, or MK-801. These results suggest that glutamate-induced death in OHSCs and erastin-induced death in cancer cells share in common a core lethal mechanism that can be inhibited by iron chelation or Fer-1.

## Erastin Inhibits System xc-
CPX and Fer-1 suppressed erastin-induced death in cancer cells and glutamate-induced toxicity in OHSCs, consistent with a common iron- and ROS-dependent death execution mechanism. We wondered whether any death-initiating mechanisms could also be shared between these two processes.

Glutamate-induced death in brain cells can be initiated by calcium influx through ionotropic glutamate receptors and through competitive inhibition of cystine uptake by the Na+-independent cystine/glutamate antiporter, system xc-. The calcium chelators BAPTA-AM, Fura-2, and EGTA had no effect on erastin-induced death, arguing against a role for Ca2+ influx in this process. However, we observed striking clustering of erastin and sulfasalazine (SAS), a specific inhibitor of system xc-, in a modulatory profile of 19 oxidative and nonoxidative lethal molecules generated in HT-1080 cells. If blockade of system xc--mediated cystine import can trigger ferroptosis, then providing this metabolite to cells through an alternative means should rescue from death. Indeed, beta-mercaptoethanol (beta-ME), which can circumvent the inhibition of system xc- by promoting cystine uptake through an alternative pathway, strongly inhibited cell death in HT-1080 cells induced by erastin, SAS, and glutamate. As predicted by these results, SAS, like erastin, behaved as an RSL compound, albeit with considerably lower potency than erastin. This is nonetheless noteworthy, as SAS is an FDA-approved drug not previously shown to demonstrate such activity.

System xc- is a disulfide-linked heterodimer composed of SLC7A11 (xCT) and SLC3A2 (4F2hc and CD98hc). Inhibition of system xc- can lead to a compensatory transcriptional upregulation of SLC7A11. Consistent with this, we observed substantial upregulation of SLC7A11 in HT-1080 cells that were treated with erastin or SAS, an effect that was suppressed by beta-ME, but not DFO or Fer-1. Further confirming the relevance of system xc- to erastin-induced ferroptosis, siRNA-mediated silencing of SLC7A11 with two independent siRNAs sensitized HT-1080 cells to erastin-induced death, whereas transfection of HT-1080 cells with a plasmid encoding DDK-tagged SLC7A11 conferred protection from erastin- and SAS-induced death. Given these results, we directly examined the uptake of [14C]-cystine into HT-1080 cells. Erastin (10 µM), glutamate (50 mM), and SAS (1 mM) abolished the Na+-independent uptake of [14C]-cystine, whereas RSL3 had no effect on this process.

How does erastin inhibit system xc-? Analysis of affinity purification data identified SLC7A5 (LAT1, 4F2lc, and CD98lc) as the lone protein bound by an active erastin affinity analog in lysates from both HRAS-wild-type BJeH and HRAS mutant BJeLR cells. SLC7A5 (like SLC7A11) is one of six light chains that bind SLC3A2 to form amino acid transporters of differing substrate selectivity. The SLC7A5/SLC3A2 complex (system L) transports large, neutral amino acids. In a profile of 123 metabolites from human Jurkat T lymphocytes treated with erastin (1 µM, 25 min), highly significant decreases were observed in the levels of system L substrates, whereas the levels of nonsystem L substrates were unchanged or increased. However, unlike inhibition of system xc- using excess glutamate (12.5 mM), inhibition of system L using excess D-phenylalanine (12.5 mM) did not strongly sensitize to erastin. Together, this suggests that erastin inhibits system L-mediated amino acid uptake but that this does not contribute directly to ferroptosis. Rather, erastin binding to SLC7A5 or the SLC7A5/SLC3A2 complex likely interferes with cystine uptake by the SLC3A2/SLC7A11 complex in trans.

## NADPH Oxidases Provide One Source of Death-Inducing ROS in Erastin-Treated Cells
Blocking system xc- inhibits cysteine-dependent glutathione (GSH) synthesis and also inhibits the transplasma membrane cysteine redox shuttle. Both effects impair cellular antioxidant defenses, thereby facilitating toxic ROS accumulation. Having ruled out the mitochondrial ETC as a source of death-inducing ROS in erastin-treated cells, we examined the role of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase (NOX) family of superoxide-producing enzymes (NOX1-5, DUOX1,2), which are upregulated in several RAS mutant tumors. Erastin-induced ferroptosis was strongly suppressed in Calu-1 cells by the canonical NOX inhibitor diphenylene iodonium (DPI), the NOX1/4-specific inhibitor GKT137831, and an inhibitor of the NADPH-generating pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), 6-aminonicotinamide (6-AN). Given that Calu-1 cells express NOX1 at much higher levels than NOX4, NOX1 is the most likely candidate to mediate the observed NOX-dependent lethal effects in these cells. Additionally, shRNA-mediated silencing of two PPP enzymes, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PGD), also prevented erastin-induced ferroptosis in Calu-1 cells to the same extent as silencing of VDAC2. 6-AN also prevented cell death as well as ROS production in BJeLR cells, suggesting an important role for this pathway in these cell types. On the other hand, NOX and PPP inhibitors were only partially effective at preventing erastin-induced ferroptosis in HT-1080 cells, indicating that other pathways, in addition to the PPP/NOX pathway, can contribute to the onset of death in erastin-treated cells once the appropriate conditions have been set by the inhibition of system xc-.

# Discussion

Ferroptotic death is morphologically, biochemically, and genetically distinct from apoptosis, various forms of necrosis, and autophagy. This process is characterized by the overwhelming, iron-dependent accumulation of lethal lipid ROS. Unlike other forms of apoptotic and nonapoptotic death, this requirement for ROS accumulation appears to be universal. In at least some cells, NOX family enzymes make important contributions to this process. Indeed, although we cannot exclude the possibility of a death-inducing protein or protein complex activated downstream of ROS accumulation, we posit that the executioners of death in cancer cells undergoing ferroptosis are these ROS themselves. An important prediction of this model is that, under anoxic conditions, ferroptosis will be inactive. However, even here, agents such as erastin that may prevent uptake of essential amino acids by system L are likely to be toxic to cells.

Using an shRNA library targeting most known genes encoding mitochondrial proteins, we identified specific roles for RPL8, IREB2, ATP5G3, TTC35, CS, and ACSF2 in erastin-induced ferroptosis. A plausible hypothesis to emerge from these data is that CS and ACSF2 are required to synthesize a specific lipid precursor necessary for death. Just as important, the high resolution of the arrayed approach (1 hairpin/well, minimum 5 hairpins/gene) provides confidence that the various mitochondrial genes not identified in our screen, including many implicated in apoptotic and other nonapoptotic death pathways (BID, BAK1, BAX, AIFM1, PPIF, HTRA2, ENDOG, and PGAM5), are truly not required for erastin-induced ferroptosis. This screening collection will be a valuable resource for future studies of the role of the mitochondria in cell physiology.

In cancer cells, inhibition of system xc--mediated cystine uptake by erastin, SAS, or glutamate may be sufficient to initiate iron-dependent ferroptosis. Inhibition of system xc- is, however, not necessary; RSL3 does not inhibit cystine uptake and yet triggers an otherwise similar iron- and ROS-dependent ferroptotic death program. Thus, RSL3 likely modulates the activity of a target lying downstream of or in parallel to system xc-. Importantly, this may enable RSL3 to activate ferroptosis in cells or conditions in which cystine uptake via system xc- is not limiting for survival. Lanperisone, another recently identified oncogenic RAS-selective lethal small molecule that causes nonapoptotic, iron-dependent death in mouse Kras mutant tumor cells, may also inhibit the function of system xc- or another target in the ferroptotic pathway. Other compounds that behave as RSLs, such as PEITC, oncrasin, and piperlongumine, trigger mitochondrial cytochrome c release, caspase activation, and other features of apoptosis not observed in cancer cells undergoing ferroptosis. Certain tumor cells are highly resistant to apoptosis. Thus, agents such as erastin, RSL3, and lanperisone that can trigger nonapoptotic death may exhibit a unique spectrum of clinical activity.

In some brain cell populations, inhibition of system xc- by glutamate triggers oxidative cell death dependent on iron and lipid ROS as well as Ca2+ influx, mitochondrial damage, mitochondrial ROS production, and chromatin fragmentation. These latter events, beginning with Ca2+ influx, are not required for RSL-induced ferroptosis in cancer cells, perhaps because heightened activity of NOX or other pro-oxidant enzymes or basally altered membrane lipid composition is sufficient to promote death in the absence of these additional features. Regardless, the oxidative death pathways triggered in cancer cells and brain cells by blockade of cystine uptake both appear to access a core iron- and ROS-dependent ferroptotic mechanism, accounting for the ability of Fer-1 and CPX to attenuate death in both cases.

The specific role of iron in ferroptosis remains unclear. Ferroptosis cannot be explained by a simple increase in H2O2-dependent, iron-catalyzed ROS production (i.e., Fenton chemistry), as H2O2-induced death is distinct from RSL-induced ferroptosis. Rather, our results are most consistent with one or more iron-dependent enzymes functioning as part of the core oxidative lethal mechanism. The void created in the antioxidant defenses of the cell by the inhibition of cystine uptake by erastin may be required to unleash the activity of these enzymes. Thus, for better or worse, the aberrantly elevated levels of iron that are observed in some cancer cells and pathological neuronal populations may predispose to ferroptotic death in situations of cystine or cysteine limitation.

# Methods

Analysis of Reactive Oxygen Species Production
The day before the experiment, 200,000 cells/well were seeded in 6-well dishes. The day of the experiment, cells were treated with test compounds for the indicated times; harvested by trypsinization; resuspended in 500 µl Hanks Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS, Gibco) containing H2DCFDA (25 µM), C11-BODIPY(581/591) (2 µM), or MitoSOX (5 µM); and incubated for 10 min at 37°C in a tissue culture incubator. Cells were then resuspended in 500 µl of fresh HBSS, strained through a 40 µm cell strainer, and analyzed using a flow cytometer equipped with 488 nm laser for excitation. Data were collected from the FL1 (H2DCFDA, C11-BODIPY) or FL2 channel (MitoSOX). A minimum of 10,000 cells were analyzed per condition.

Cancer Cell Viability Measurements
Cell viability was typically assessed in 384-well format by Alamar Blue fluorescence (ex/em 530/590) measured on a Victor3 plate reader. In some experiments, Trypan blue dye exclusion counting was performed by using an automated cell counter. Cell viability under test conditions is reported as a percentage relative to the negative control treatment.

shRNA Screening
An arrayed collection of 6,528 shRNA hairpins targeting 1,087 genes was screened in 384-well plate format in both Calu-1 and HT-1080 cells. shRNAs targeting GFP and RFP, randomly distributed through each plate, served as negative controls. Four-hundred cells/well were infected in duplicate for 48 hr with 2 µl shRNA-containing viral supernatant, selected for 24 hr in puromycin (1.5 µg/ml), and then treated with DMSO, erastin (7.3 µM), or STS (1 µM) for 24 hr. Cell viability was determined by using Alamar Blue. For each hairpin within each treatment condition, a cell death rescue score was computed as the ratio of the average viability of the two replicates to the average viability of the within-plate negative controls. These scores were used to compare the effects between compounds. To identify genes required for ferroptosis, individual hairpins were scored as hits if they displayed an average death suppression >=3 median average deviations from the median within-plate or screen-wide negative control values. Fifty-one candidate genes were identified with the same two (or more) unique hairpins per gene called as hits in both the Calu-1 and HT-1080 screens. For each candidate gene, confirmation studies using reverse-transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis of mRNA silencing were performed in HT-1080 cells by using freshly prepared virus.

[14C]-Cystine Uptake Assay
Two-hundred thousand (200,000) HT-1080 cells/well were seeded overnight in 6-well dishes. The next day, cells were washed twice in prewarmed Na+-free uptake buffer (137 mM choline chloride, 3 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM D-glucose, 0.7 mM K2HPO4, and 10 mM HEPES [pH 7.4]) and then incubated for 10 min at 37°C in 1 ml of uptake buffer to deplete cellular amino acids. At this point, in each well, the buffer was replaced with 600 µl uptake buffer containing compound and 0.12 µCi (80-110 mCi/mmol) of L-[3,3'-14C]-cystine and incubated for 3 min at 37°C. Cells were then washed three times with ice-cold uptake buffer and lysed in 500 µl 0.1 M NaOH. To this lysate, 15 ml of scintillation fluid was added, and radioactive counts per minute were obtained by using a scintillation counter. All measurements were performed in triplicate for each condition.

Statistical Analyses
All statistical analyses were performed by using Prism 5.0c.
