# GENERAL NATURE OF THE GENETIC CODE FOR PROTEINS

# Introduction
There is now a mass of indirect evidence which suggests that the amino-acid sequence along the polypeptide chain of a protein is determined by the sequence of the bases along some particular part of the nucleic acid of the genetic material. Since there are twenty common amino-acids found throughout Nature, but only four common bases, it has often been surmised that the sequence of the four bases is in some way a code for the sequence of the amino acids. In this article we report genetic experiments which, together with the work of others, suggest that the genetic code is of the following general type:
(a) A group of three bases (or, less likely, a multiple of three bases) codes one amino-acid.
(b) The code is not of the overlapping type.
(c) The sequence of the bases is read from a fixed starting point. This determines how the long sequences of bases are to be correctly read off as triplets. There are no special 'commas' to show how to select the right triplets. If the starting point is displaced by one base, then the reading into triplets is displaced, and thus becomes incorrect.
(d) The code is probably 'degenerate'; that is, in general, one particular amino-acid can be coded by one of several triplets of bases.

# Main
The evidence that the genetic code is not overlapping does not come from our work, but from that of Wittmann and of Tsugita and Fraenkel-Conrat on the mutants of tobacco mosaic virus produced by nitrous acid. In an overlapping triplet code, an alteration to one base will in general change three adjacent amino-acids in the polypeptide chain. Their work on the alterations produced in the protein of the virus show that usually only one amino-acid at a time is changed as a result of treating the ribonucleic acid (RNA) of the virus with nitrous acid. In the rarer cases where two amino-acids are altered (owing presumably to two separate deaminations by the nitrous acid on one piece of RNA), the altered amino-acids are not in adjacent positions in the polypeptide chain.

Brenner had previously shown that, if the code were universal (that is, the same throughout Nature), then all overlapping triplet codes were impossible. Moreover, all the abnormal human haemoglobins studied in detail show only single amino-acid changes. The newer experimental results essentially rule out all simple codes of the overlapping type.

If the code is not overlapping, then there must be some arrangement to show how to select the correct triplets (or quadruplets, or whatever it may be) along the continuous sequence of bases. One obvious suggestion is that, say, every fourth base is a 'comma'. Another idea is that certain triplets make 'sense', whereas others make 'nonsense', as in the comma-free codes of Crick, Griffith and Orgel. Alternatively, the correct choice may be made by starting at a fixed point and working along the sequence of bases three (or four, or whatever) at a time. It is this possibility which we now favour.

Our genetic experiments have been carried out on the B cistron of the rII region of the bacteriophage T4, which attacks strains of Escherichia coli. This is the system so brilliantly exploited by Benzer. The rII region consists of two adjacent genes, or 'cistrons', called cistron A and cistron B. The wild-type phage will grow on both E. coli B and on E. coli K12, but a phage which has lost the function of either gene will not grow on K12. Such a phage produces an r plaque on B. Many point mutations of the genes are known which behave in this way. Deletions of part of the region are also found. Other mutations, known as 'leaky', show partial function; that is, they will grow on K12 but their plaque-type on B is not truly wild. We report here our work on the mutant FC0 in the B1 segment of the B cistron. This mutant was originally produced by the action of proflavin.

We have previously argued that acridines such as proflavin act as mutagens because they add or delete a base or bases. The most striking evidence in favour of this is that mutants produced by acridines are seldom 'leaky'; they are almost always completely lacking in the function of the gene. Since our note was published, experimental data from two sources have been added to our previous evidence: (1) we have examined a set of 126 rII mutants made with acridine yellow; of these only 6 are leaky (typically about half the mutants made with base analogues are leaky); (2) Streisinger has found that whereas mutants of the lysozyme of phage T4 produced by base-analogues are usually leaky, all lysozyme mutants produced by proflavin are negative, that is, the function is completely lacking.

If an acridine mutant is produced by, say, adding a base, it should revert to 'wild-type' by deleting a base. Our work on revertants of FC0 shows that it usually reverts not by reversing the original mutation but by producing a second mutation at a nearby point on the genetic map. That is, by a 'suppressor' in the same gene. In one case (or possibly two cases) it may have reverted back to true wild, but in at least 18 other cases the 'wild type' produced was really a double mutant with a 'wild' phenotype. Other workers have found a similar phenomenon with rII mutants, and Jinks has made a detailed analysis of suppressors in the h gene.

The genetic map of these 18 suppressors of FC0 shows that they all fall in the B1 segment of the gene, though not all of them are very close to FC0. They scatter over a region about, say, one-tenth the size of the B cistron. Not all are at different sites. We have found eight sites in all, but most of them fall into or near two close clusters of sites.

In all cases the suppressor was a non-leaky r. That is, it gave an r plaque on B and would not grow on K12. This is the phenotype shown by a complete deletion of the gene, and shows that the function is lacking. The only possible exception was one case where the suppressor appeared to back-mutate so fast that we could not study it.

Each suppressor, as we have said, fails to grow on K12. Reversion of each can therefore be studied by the same procedure used for FC0. In a few cases these mutants apparently revert to the original wild-type, but usually they revert by forming a double mutant. Again all these new suppressors are non-leaky r mutants, and all map within the B1 segment for one site in the B2 segment.

Once again we have repeated the process on two of the new suppressors, with the same general results.

All these mutants, except the original FC0, occurred spontaneously. We have, however, produced one set (as suppressors of FC7) using acridine yellow as a mutagen. The spectrum of suppressors we get is crudely similar to the spontaneous spectrum, and all the mutants are non-leaky r's. We have also tested a small selection of all our mutants and shown that their reversion-rates are increased by acridine yellow.

Thus in all we have about eighty independent r mutants, all suppressors of FC0, or suppressors of suppressors, or suppressors of suppressors of suppressors. They all fall within a limited region of the gene and they are all non-leaky r mutants.

The double mutants (which contain a mutation plus its suppressor) which plate on K12 have a variety of plaque types on B. Some are indistinguishable from wild, some can be distinguished from wild with difficulty, while others are easily distinguishable and produce plaques rather like r.

We have checked in a few cases that the phenomenon is quite distinct from 'complementation', since the two mutants which separately are phenotypically r, and together are wild or pseudo-wild, must be put together in the same piece of genetic material. A simultaneous infection of K12 by the two mutants in separate viruses will not do.

Our explanation of all these facts is based on the theory set out at the beginning of this article. Although we have no direct evidence that the B cistron produces a polypeptide chain (probably through an RNA intermediate), in what follows we shall assume this to be so. To fix ideas, we imagine that the string of nucleotide bases is read, triplet by triplet, from a starting point on the left of the B cistron. We now suppose that, for example, the mutant FC0 was produced by the insertion of an additional base in the wild-type sequence. Then this addition of a base at the FC0 site will mean that the reading of all the triplets to the right of FC0 will be shifted along one base, and will therefore be incorrect. Thus the amino-acid sequence of the protein which the B cistron is presumed to produce will be completely altered from that point onwards. This explains why the function of the gene is lacking. To simplify the explanation, we now postulate that a suppressor of FC0 (for example, FC1) is formed by deleting a base. Thus when the FC1 mutation is present by itself, all triplets to the right of FC1 will be read incorrectly and thus the function will be absent. However, when both mutations are present in the same piece of DNA, as in the pseudo-wild double mutant FC(0 + 1), then although the reading of triplets between FC0 and FC1 will be altered, the original reading will be restored to the rest of the gene. This could explain why such double mutants do not always have a true wild phenotype but are often pseudo-wild, since on our theory a small length of their amino-acid sequence is different from that of the wild-type.

We can now ask: What is the character of any double mutant we like to form by putting together in the same gene any pair of mutants from our set of about eighty? Obviously, in some cases we already know the answer, since some combinations of a + with a - were formed in order to isolate the mutants. But, by definition, no pair consisting of one + with another + has been obtained in this way, and there are many combinations of + with - not so far tested.

Now our theory clearly predicts that all combinations of the type + with + (or - with -) should give an r phenotype and not plate on K12. We have put together 14 such pairs of mutants and found this prediction confirmed.

At first sight one would expect that all combinations of the type (+ with -) would be wild or pseudo-wild, but the situation is a little more intricate than that, and must be considered more closely. This springs from the obvious fact that if the code is made of triplets, any long sequence of bases can be read correctly in one way, but incorrectly (by starting at the wrong point) in two different ways, depending whether the 'reading frame' is shifted one place to the right or one place to the left.

If we symbolize a shift, by one place, of the reading frame in one direction by → and in the opposite direction by ←, then we can establish the convention that our + is always at the head of the arrow, and our - at the tail.

For convenience we have designated our original mutant FC0 by the symbol + (this choice is a pure convention at this stage) which we have so far considered as the addition of a single base. The suppressors of FC0 have therefore been designated -. The suppressors of these suppressors have in the same way been labelled as +, and the suppressors of these last sets have again been labelled -.

We must now ask: Why do our suppressors not extend over the whole of the gene? The simplest postulate to make is that the shift of the reading frame produces some triplets the reading of which is 'unacceptable'; for example, they may be 'nonsense', or stand for 'end the chain', or be unacceptable in some other way due to the complications of protein structure. This means that a suppressor of, say, FC0 must be within a region such that no 'unacceptable' triplet is produced by the shift in the reading frame between FC0 and its suppressor. But, clearly, since for any sequence there are two possible misreadings, we might expect that the 'unacceptable' triplets produced by a → shift would occur in different places on the map from those produced by a ← shift.

Examination of the spectra of suppressors suggests that while the → shift is acceptable anywhere within our region (though not outside it) the shift ←, starting from points near FC0, is acceptable over only a more limited stretch. Somewhere in the left part of our region, between FC0 or FC9 and the FC1 group, there must be one or more unacceptable triplets when a ← shift is made; similarly for the region to the right of the FC21 cluster. Thus we predict that a combination of a + with a - will be wild or pseudo-wild if it involves a → shift, but that such pairs involving a ← shift will be phenotypically r if the arrow crosses one or more of the forbidden places, since then an unacceptable triplet will be produced.

We have tested this prediction in 28 cases. We expected 19 of these to be wild, or pseudo-wild, and 9 of them to have the r phenotype. In all cases our prediction was correct. We regard this as a striking confirmation of our theory. It may be of interest that the theory was constructed before these particular experimental results were obtained.

So far we have spoken as if the evidence supported a triplet code, but this was simply for illustration. Exactly the same results would be obtained if the code operated with groups of, say, 5 bases. Moreover, our symbols + and - must not be taken to mean literally the addition or subtraction of a single base.

It is easy to see that our symbolism is more exactly as follows:
+ represents modulo +m, n
- represents modulo -m, n
where n (a positive integer) is the coding ratio (that is, the number of bases which code one amino-acid) and m is any integral number of bases, positive or negative.

It can also be seen that our choice of reading direction is arbitrary, and that the same results (to a first approximation) would be obtained in whichever direction the genetic material was read, that is, whether the starting point is on the right or the left of the gene, as conventionally drawn.

The somewhat abstract description given above is necessary for generality, but fortunately we have convincing evidence that the coding ratio is in fact 3 or a multiple of 3.

This we have obtained by constructing triple mutants of the form (+ with + with +) or (- with - with -). One must be careful not to make shifts across the 'unacceptable' regions for the ← shifts, but these we can avoid by a proper choice of mutants.

We have so far examined six cases and in all cases the triples are wild or pseudo-wild.

The rather striking nature of this result can be seen by considering one of them, for example, the triple (FC0 with FC40 with FC38). These three mutants are, by themselves, all of like type (+). We can say this not merely from the way in which they were obtained, but because each of them, when combined with our mutant FC9 (-), gives the wild, or pseudo-wild phenotype. However, either singly or together in pairs they have an r phenotype, and will not grow on K12. That is, the function of the gene is absent. Nevertheless, the combination of all three in the same gene partly restores the function and produces a pseudo-wild phage which grows on K12.

This is exactly what one would expect, in favourable cases, if the coding ratio were 3 or a multiple of 3.

Our ability to find the coding ratio thus depends on the fact that, in at least one of our composite mutants which are 'wild', at least one amino-acid must have been added to or deleted from the polypeptide chain without disturbing the function of the gene-product too greatly.

This is a very fortunate situation. The fact that we can make these changes and can study so large a region probably comes about because this part of the protein is not essential for its function. That this is so has already been suggested by Champe and Benzer in their work on complementation in the rII region. By a special test (combined infection on K12, followed by plating on B) it is possible to examine the function of the A cistron and the B cistron separately. A particular deletion, 1589 covers the right-hand end of the A cistron and part of the left-hand end of the B cistron. Although 1589 abolishes the A function, they showed that it allows the B function to be expressed to a considerable extent. The region of the B cistron deleted by 1589 is that into which all our FC mutants fall.

We have used this deletion to reinforce our idea that the sequence is read in groups from a fixed starting point. Normally, an alteration confined to the A cistron (be it a deletion, an acridine mutant, or any other mutant) does not prevent the expression of the B cistron. Conversely, no alteration within the B cistron prevents the function of the A cistron. This implies that there may be a region between the two cistrons which separates them and allows their functions to be expressed individually.

We argued that the deletion 1589 will have lost this separating region and that therefore the two (partly damaged) cistrons should have been joined together. Experiments show this to be the case, for now an alteration to the left-hand end of the A cistron, if combined with deletion 1589, can prevent the B function from appearing. Either the mutant P43 or X142 (both of which revert strongly with acridines) will prevent the B function when the two cistrons are joined, although both of these mutants are in the A cistron. This is also true of X142 S1, a suppressor of X142. However, the double mutant (X142 with X142 S1), of the type (+ with -), which by itself is pseudo-wild, still has the B function when combined with 1589. We have also tested in this way the 10 deletions listed by Benzer, which fall wholly to the left of 1589. Of these, three (386, 168 and 221) prevent the B function, whereas the other seven show it. We surmise that each of these seven has lost a number of bases which is a multiple of 3. There are theoretical reasons for expecting that deletions may not be random in length, but will more often have lost a number of bases equal to an integral multiple of the coding ratio.

It would not surprise us if it were eventually shown that deletion 1589 produces a protein which consists of part of the protein from the A cistron and part of that from the B cistron, joined together in the same polypeptide chain, and having to some extent the function of the undamaged B protein.

It remains to show that the coding ratio is probably 3, rather than a multiple of 3. Previous rather rough estimates of the coding ratio might suggest that the coding ratio is not far from 6. This would imply, on our theory, that the alteration in FC0 was not to one base, but to two bases (or, more correctly, to an even number of bases).

We have some additional evidence which suggests that this is unlikely. First, in our set of 126 mutants produced by acridine yellow (referred to earlier) we have four independent mutants which fall at or close to the FC9 site. By a suitable choice of partners, we have been able to show that two are + and two are -. Secondly, we have two mutants (X146 and X225), produced by hydrazine, which fall on or near the site FC30. These we have been able to show are both of type -.

Thus unless both acridines and hydrazine usually delete (or add) an even number of bases, this evidence supports a coding ratio of 3. However, as the action of these mutagens is not understood in detail, we cannot be certain that the coding ratio is not 6, although 3 seems more likely.

We have preliminary results which show that other acridine mutants often revert by means of close suppressors, but it is too sketchy to report here. A tentative map of some suppressors of P83, a mutant at the other end of the B cistron, in segment B9a, is shown. They occur within a shorter region than the suppressors of FC0, covering a distance of about one-twentieth of the B cistron. The double mutant wild-type (2 + 5) has the r phenotype, as expected.

If the code is a triplet code, there are 64 (4 x 4 x 4) possible triplets. Our results suggest that it is unlikely that only 20 of these represent the 20 amino-acids and that the remaining 44 are nonsense. If this were the case, the region over which suppressors of the FC0 family occur (perhaps a quarter of the B cistron) should be very much smaller than we observe, since a shift of frame should then, by chance, produce a nonsense reading at a much closer distance. This argument depends on the size of the protein which we have assumed the B cistron to produce. We do not know this, but the length of the cistron suggests that the protein may contain about 200 amino-acids. Thus the code is probably 'degenerate', that is, in general more than one triplet codes for each amino-acid. It is well known that if this were so, one could also account for the major dilemma of the coding problem, namely, that while the base composition of the DNA can be very different in different micro-organisms, the amino-acid composition of their proteins only changes by a moderate amount. However, exactly how many triplets code amino-acids and how many have other functions we are unable to say.

# Discussion
Our theory leads to one very clear prediction. Suppose one could examine the amino-acid sequence of the 'pseudo-wild' protein produced by one of our double mutants of the (+ with -) type. Conventional theory suggests that since the gene is only altered in two places, only two amino-acids would be changed. Our theory, on the other hand, predicts that a string of amino-acids would be altered, covering the region of the polypeptide chain corresponding to the region on the gene between the two mutants. A good protein on which to test this hypothesis is the lysozyme of the phage, at present being studied chemically by Dreyer and genetically by Streisinger.

At the recent Biochemical Congress at Moscow, the audience of Symposium I was startled by the announcement of Nirenberg that he and Matthaei had produced polyphenylalanine (that is, a polypeptide all the residues of which are phenylalanine) by adding polyuridylic acid (that is, an RNA the bases of which are all uracil) to a cell-free system which can synthesize protein. This implies that a sequence of uracils codes for phenylalanine, and our work suggests that it is probably a triplet of uracils.

It is possible by various devices, either chemical or enzymatic, to synthesize polyribonucleotides with defined or partly defined sequences. If these, too, will produce specific polypeptides, the coding problem is wide open for experimental attack, and in fact many laboratories, including our own, are already working on the problem. If the coding ratio is indeed 3, as our results suggest, and if the code is the same throughout Nature, then the genetic code may well be solved within a year.
