# Abstract

There is increasing evidence that genome-wide association (GWA) studies represent a powerful approach to the identification of genes involved in common human diseases. We describe a joint GWA study (using the Affymetrix GeneChip 500K Mapping Array Set) undertaken in the British population, which has examined ~2,000 individuals for each of 7 major diseases and a shared set of ~3,000 controls. Case-control comparisons identified 24 independent association signals at P < 5 × 10⁻⁷: 1 in bipolar disorder, 1 in coronary artery disease, 9 in Crohn's disease, 3 in rheumatoid arthritis, 7 in type 1 diabetes and 3 in type 2 diabetes. On the basis of prior findings and replication studies thus-far completed, almost all of these signals reflect genuine susceptibility effects. We observed association at many previously identified loci, and found compelling evidence that some loci confer risk for more than one of the diseases studied. Across all diseases, we identified a large number of further signals (including 58 loci with single-point P values between 10⁻⁵ and 5 × 10⁻⁷) likely to yield additional susceptibility loci. The importance of appropriately large samples was confirmed by the modest effect sizes observed at most loci identified. This study thus represents a thorough validation of the GWA approach. It has also demonstrated that careful use of a shared control group represents a safe and effective approach to GWA analyses of multiple disease phenotypes; has generated a genome-wide genotype database for future studies of common diseases in the British population; and shown that, provided individuals with non-European ancestry are excluded, the extent of population stratification in the British population is generally modest. Our findings offer new avenues for exploring the pathophysiology of these important disorders. We anticipate that our data, results and software, which will be widely available to other investigators, will provide a powerful resource for human genetics.

# Introduction

Despite extensive research efforts for more than a decade, the genetic basis of common human diseases remains largely unknown. Although there have been some notable successes, linkage and candidate gene association studies have often failed to deliver definitive results. Yet the identification of the variants, genes and pathways involved in particular diseases offers a potential route to new therapies, improved diagnosis and better disease prevention. For some time it has been hoped that the advent of genome-wide association (GWA) studies would provide a successful new tool for unlocking the genetic basis of many of these common causes of human morbidity and mortality.

Three recent advances mean that GWA studies that are powered to detect plausible effect sizes are now possible. First, the International HapMap resource, which documents patterns of genome-wide variation and linkage disequilibrium in four population samples, greatly facilitates both the design and analysis of association studies. Second, the availability of dense genotyping chips, containing sets of hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that provide good coverage of much of the human genome, means that for the first time GWA studies for thousands of cases and controls are technically and financially feasible. Third, appropriately large and well-characterized clinical samples have been assembled for many common diseases.

The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC) was formed with a view to exploring the utility, design and analyses of GWA studies. It brought together over 50 research groups from the UK that are active in researching the genetics of common human diseases, with expertise ranging from clinical, through genotyping, to informatics and statistical analysis. Here we describe the main experiment of the consortium: GWA studies of 2,000 cases and 3,000 shared controls for 7 complex human diseases of major public health importance—bipolar disorder (BD), coronary artery disease (CAD), Crohn's disease (CD), hypertension (HT), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), type 1 diabetes (T1D), and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Two further experiments undertaken by the consortium will be reported elsewhere: a GWA study for tuberculosis in 1,500 cases and 1,500 controls, sampled from The Gambia; and an association study of 1,500 common controls with 1,000 cases for each of breast cancer, multiple sclerosis, ankylosing spondylitis and autoimmune thyroid disease, all typed at around 15,000 mainly non-synonymous SNPs. By simultaneously studying seven diseases with differing aetiologies, we hoped to develop insights, not only into the specific genetic contributions to each of the diseases, but also into differences in allelic architecture across the diseases. A further major aim was to address important methodological issues of relevance to all GWA studies, such as quality control, design and analysis. In addition to our main association results, we address several of these issues below, including the choice of controls for genetic studies, the extent of population structure within Great Britain, sample sizes necessary to detect genetic effects of varying sizes, and improvements in genotype-calling algorithms and analytical methods.

# Main

**Samples and experimental analyses.** Individuals included in the study were living within England, Scotland and Wales ('Great Britain') and the vast majority had self-identified themselves as white Europeans (153 individuals with non-Caucasian ancestry were excluded from final analysis). The seven conditions selected for study are all common familial diseases of major public health importance both in the UK and globally, and for which suitable nationally representative sample sets were available. The control individuals came from two sources: 1,500 individuals from the 1958 British Birth Cohort (58C) and 1,500 individuals selected from blood donors recruited as part of this project (UK Blood Services (UKBS) controls).

We adopted an experimental design with 2,000 cases for each disease and 3,000 combined controls. All 17,000 samples were genotyped with the GeneChip 500K Mapping Array Set (Affymetrix chip), which comprises 500,568 SNPs. The power of this study (estimated from simulations that mimic linkage disequilibrium patterns in the HapMap Caucasian sample (CEU)) averaged across SNPs with minor allele frequencies (MAFs) above 5% is estimated to be 43% for alleles with a relative risk of 1.3, increasing to 80% for a relative risk of 1.5, for a P-value threshold of 5 × 10⁻⁷.

We developed a new algorithm, CHIAMO, which we applied to simultaneously call the genotypes from all individuals. Cross-platform comparison showed CHIAMO to outperform BRLMM (the standard Affymetrix algorithm) by having an error rate under 0.2%, and comparison of 10⁸ duplicate genotypes in our study gave a discordance rate of 0.12%. We excluded 809 samples after checks for contamination, false identity, non-Caucasian ancestry and relatedness; 16,179 individuals remained in the study.

Genome-wide, 469,557 SNPs (93.8%) passed our quality control filters giving an average call rate of 99.63%. Of those, 392,575 have study-wide MAFs > 1% (45,106 have MAFs < 0.1%). Initial analyses of the polymorphic SNPs suggest that patterns of linkage disequilibrium in our samples are very similar to those in HapMap. Therefore, we expect genome coverage with the Affymetrix 500K set in this study to be similar to that estimated for the HapMap CEU panel. All SNPs passing quality control filters were used in the association analyses, although power is very low for SNPs with low MAFs (unless they have unusually large effects). On visual inspection of the cluster plots of SNPs showing apparently strong association, we removed a further 638 SNPs with poor clustering.

**Control groups.** Our main purpose in using two control groups was to assess possible bias in ascertaining control samples. In addition, noting that DNA sample processing differed between these groups, comparison of control groups also provides a check for effects of differential genotyping errors as a result of differences in DNA collection and preparation. Mantel-extension tests for differences in allele frequencies of SNPs between subjects from the 58BC and UKBS collections, stratified by 12 broad regions of Great Britain, showed few significant differences. This indicates that there would be little bias due to use of either sample as a control group for any of the case series, and justifies our combining of the two control groups to form a single group of 3,000 subjects for our main analyses.

One consequence of using a shared control group relates to the potential for misclassification bias: a proportion of the controls is likely to have the disease of interest and some others will develop it in the future. However, the effect this has on power is modest unless the extent of misclassification bias is substantial; for example, if 5% of controls would meet the definition of cases at the same age, the loss of power is approximately the same as that due to a reduction of the sample size by 10%. Even for the higher prevalence conditions examined (such as HT, CAD and T2D), the precise ascertainment schemes used here (which enriched for more extreme phenotypes and/or strong family history) will have limited the proportions of controls meeting case criteria to low levels (for example, to < 5%).

**Geographical variation and population structure.** An additional cause of false positive findings is hidden population structure. Case and control samples may differ in the distribution of their ancestry, either owing to control sampling effects or to confounding when different ancestries carry higher disease risk. Even after exclusion of individuals with evidence of recent non-European ancestry, the British population is heterogeneous.

We first examined our samples for non-European ancestry using multidimensional scaling and excluded 153 individuals on this basis. We next looked for evidence of population heterogeneity by studying allele frequency differences between the 12 broad geographical regions. Widespread small differences in allele frequencies are evident. Thirteen genomic regions showing strong geographical variation were identified. The predominant pattern is variation along a NW/SE axis. The most likely cause for these marked geographical differences is natural selection, most plausibly in populations ancestral to those now in the UK. Variation due to selection has previously been implicated at LCT (lactase) and major histocompatibility complex (MHC), and within-UK differentiation at 4p14 has been found independently. evolutionary interest, genes showing evidence of natural selection are particularly interesting for the biology of traits such as infectious diseases; possible targets for selection include NADSYN1 at 11q13, which could have a role in prevention of pellagra, as well as TLR1 at 4p14, for which a role in the biology of tuberculosis and leprosy has been suggested.

The overall effect of population structure on our association results seems to be small, once recent migrants from outside Europe are excluded. Estimates of over-dispersion of the association trend test statistics (usually denoted λ) ranged from 1.03 and 1.05 for RA and T1D, respectively, to 1.08–1.11 for the remaining diseases. Some of this over-dispersion could be due to factors other than structure. We conclude that, for most of the genome, population structure has at most a small confounding effect in our study, and as a consequence the analyses reported below do not correct for structure.

**Disease association results.** We assessed evidence for association in several ways, drawing on both classical and bayesian statistical approaches. For polymorphic SNPs on the Affymetrix chip, we performed trend tests and general genotype tests between each case collection and the pooled controls, and calculated analogous Bayes factors. To help to capture putative disease loci not on the Affymetrix chip we used a new multilocus method to simulate, or impute, genotype data at 2,193,483 HapMap SNPs not on the Affymetrix chip.

Thefindings from the WTCCC scan for the 15 variants for which there was strong prior evidence of association with one or more of the diseases studied showed that all but two of these show associations in our study, with the magnitude of the evidence generally consistent with their effect sizes as estimated from prior studies. One of the signals for which we failed to obtain evidence of replication (APOE in CAD) is poorly tagged by the Affymetrix 500K chip. The other (INS in T1D) is represented by a single SNP that marginally failed our study-wide quality control filters but which was nonetheless strongly associated with T1D when examined.

The single-disease trend and genotypic tests identified 21 signals across the 7 diseases that exceeded a threshold of 5 × 10⁻⁷. Four further strong (with P < 5 × 10⁻⁷) associations were revealed by the other primary analyses described. One locus (in RA) was revealed by the sex-differentiated analysis, two through multilocus approaches (both for T1D) and one through an analysis which combined cases from more than one autoimmune disease. Of the 18 loci implicated in autoimmune diseases, 5 show associations (P < 0.001) to more than 1 condition.

**Bipolar disorder (BD).** Bipolar disorder refers to an episodic recurrent pathological disturbance in mood ranging from extreme elation or mania to severe depression. Pathogenesis is poorly understood but there is robust evidence for a substantial genetic contribution to risk. heritability is 80–90%. The definition of BD phenotype is based solely on clinical features. Increasing evidence suggests an overlap in genetic susceptibility with schizophrenia. In particular association findings have been reported with both disorders at DAOA, DISC1, NRG1 and DTNBP1.

The strongest signal in BD was with rs420259 at chromosome 16p12 (genotypic test P = 6.3 × 10⁻⁸) and the best-fitting genetic model was recessive. recognizing that this signal was not additionally supported by the expanded reference group analysis and that independent replication is essential, we note that several genes at this locus could have pathological relevance to BD. These include PALB2, which is involved in stability of key nuclear structures including chromatin and the nuclear matrix; NDUFAB1, which encodes a subunit of complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain; and DCTN5, which encodes a protein involved in intracellular transport that is known to interact with the gene 'disrupted in schizophrenia 1' (DISC1), the latter having been implicated in susceptibility to bipolar disorder as well as schizophrenia. amongst the other higher ranked signals, there is support for the previously suggested importance of GABA neurotransmission, glutamate neurotransmission and synaptic function.

**Coronary artery disease (CAD).** Coronary artery disease is a chronic degenerative condition in which lipid and fibrous matrix is deposited in the walls of the coronary arteries to form atheromatous plaques. In addition to lifestyle and environmental factors, genes are important in the aetiology of CAD. Genetic variation is thought likely to influence risk of CAD both directly and through effects on known CAD risk factors including hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolaemia.

The most notable new finding for CAD is the powerful association on chromosome 9p21.3. Although the strongest signal is seen at rs1333049 (P = 1.8 × 10⁻¹⁴), associations are seen for SNPs across > 100 kilobases. The region of interest contains the coding sequences of genes for two cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors, CDKN2A and CDKN2B. Both genes have multiple isoforms and an important role in the regulation of the cell cycle. It is of interest that expression of CDKN2B is induced by transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) and that the TGFβ signalling system is implicated in the pathogenesis of human atherosclerosis. Besides CDKN2A and CDKN2B, the only other known gene nearby is MTAP which encodes methylthioadenosine phosphorylase, an enzyme that contributes to polyamine metabolism. The same region also shows replicated evidence of association to T2D in the WTCCC and other data sets, though different SNPs seem to be involved.

A potentially interesting association is at rs6922269 (P = 6.3 × 10⁻⁶), an intronic SNP in MTHFD1L. Defects in the MTHFD1L pathway may increase plasma homocysteine level. An intronic SNP in ADAMTS17 showed a much stronger association in the expanded reference group analysis.

**Crohn's disease (CD).** Crohn's disease is a common form of chronic inflammatory bowel disease. The pathogenic mechanisms probably involve a dysregulated immune response to commensal intestinal bacteria and possibly defects in mucosal barrier function or bacterial clearance. Genetic predisposition to CD is suggested by a λₛ of 17–35.

A number of CD-susceptibility loci have previously been defined, and all of these generate strong signals in our data. positional cloning identified CARD15 (NOD2) as the first confirmed CD-susceptibility gene. A second association, on chromosome 5q31 has been widely replicated. More recent studies have identified four further CD-susceptibility loci, all of which are strongly replicated. The association between CD and SNPs within IL23R is here represented by a cluster of associated SNPs. The strongest signal for CD in the present scan (at rs10210302; P = 7.1 × 10⁻¹⁴) maps to the ATG16L1 gene. The third is a locus at chromosome 10q21. Finally, strong association with a cluster of SNPs within a 1.2 Mb gene desert on chromosome 5p13.1, recapitulates the finding of a recent GWA study.

The current study identifies four further new strong association signals in CD, located on chromosomes 3p21, 5q33, 10q24 and 18p11. The first of these includes several SNPs around IRGM. IRGM encodes a GTP-binding protein which induces autophagy and is involved in elimination of intracellular bacteria, including Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The second novel CD association is seen at rs9858542, a synonymous coding SNP within the BSN gene on chromosome 3p21. A more plausible regional candidate is MST1, which encodes a protein influencing motile activity and phagocytosis by resident peritoneal macrophages. The third novel association involves a cluster of SNPs around rs10883365 on chromosome 10q24.2. The most credible candidate here is the NKX2-3 gene. Targeted disruption of the murine homologue of NKX2-3 results in defective development of the intestine and secondary lymphoid organs. The final novel association, at rs2542151 maps 5.5-kb upstream of PTPN2 on chromosome 18p11. PTPN2 encodes the T cell protein tyrosine phosphatase TCPTP, a key negative regulator of inflammatory responses. The same locus also shows strong association with T1D susceptibility and RA.

Several further loci are of interest on the basis of their biological candidacy. for example, rs9469220 mapping to the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system class II region was detected. Another interesting candidate is TNFAIP3. markers with lower levels of significance include TNFSF15 and STAT3. On the X chromosome rs2807261 maps 50-kb from the gene CD40LG. An emerging theme from molecular genetic studies of CD is the importance of defects in autophagy and the processing of phagocytosed bacteria.

**Hypertension (HT).** Hypertension refers to a clinically significant increase in blood pressure and constitutes an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Lifestyle exposures that elevate blood pressure, including sodium intake, alcohol and excess weight are well-described risk factors. Genetic factors are also important. Estimates of λₛ are approximately 2.5–3.5.

For HT there were no SNPs with significance below 5 × 10⁻⁷ but the number and distribution of association signals in the range 10⁻⁴ to 10⁻⁷ was similar to that of the other diseases studied. There are several possible explanations. First, HT may have fewer common risk alleles of larger effect sizes. Second, the present study may have failed to detect genuine common susceptibility variants of large effect size because they happened to be poorly tagged. Third, study of HT may be more susceptible to the diluting effects of misclassification bias due to the presence of hypertensive individuals within the control samples.

The most strongly associated SNPs do not identify genes from physiological systems previously implicated in hypertension. The strongest signal overall is with rs2820037 on 1q43. The closest genes are RYR2, CHRM3, and ZP4.

**Rheumatoid arthritis (RA).** Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by destruction of the synovial joints resulting in severe disability. λₛ estimates ranging from 5–10.

An association between RA and alleles of the HLA-DRB1 locus has long been established. Carriage of the T allele of the rs2476601 SNP in the PTPN22 gene has been reproducibly associated with RA. Both these previous associations emerge strongly here. RA was the sole disease for which the sex-differentiated analysis generated a strong signal due to different genetic effects in males and females. The SNP rs11761231 generates a P value of 3.9 × 10⁻⁷ for the sex-differentiated test. This genotype has no effect on disease status in males, but a strong apparently additive effect in females.

Of particular interest is the association of SNPs mapping close to both the alpha and beta chains of the IL2 receptor. RA and T1D were already known to have two disease susceptibility genes in common: at the MHC, and at PTPN22. Our study provides data indicating that this list can be extended to include variants around IL2RA (chromosome 10p15), PTPN2 (chromosome 18p11) and the chromosome 12q24 region.

**Type 1 diabetes (T1D).** Type 1 diabetes is a chronic autoimmune disorder with onset usually in childhood. The λₛ for T1D is ~15 and heritability is over 85%. There are six genes/regions for which there is strong pre-existing statistical support for a role in T1D-susceptibility: these are the major histocompatibility complex (MHC), the genes encoding insulin, CTLA-4 and PTPN22, and the regions around the interleukin 2 receptor alpha (IL2RA/CD25) and interferon-induced helicase 1 genes (IFIH1).

In this study, single-point analyses revealed three novel regions (on chromosomes 12q13, 12q24 and 16p13) showing strong evidence of association (P < 5 × 10⁻⁷). Four further regions attained similar levels of significance either through multilocus analyses (chromosomes 4q27 and 12p13), or through the combined analysis of autoimmune cases (chromosomes 18p11 and the 10p15 CD25 region).

The two signals on chromosome 12 (at 12q13 and 12q24) map to regions of extensive linkage disequilibrium covering more than ten genes. These include ERBB3 at 12q13 and SH2B3/LNK, TRAFD1 and PTPN11 at 12q24. Of those listed, PTPN11 is a particularly attractive candidate given a major role in insulin and immune signalling. Indeed, the 12q24 variant most associated with T1D also features in both the CD and RA scans. In contrast, the 16p13 region contains only two genes of unknown function, KIAA0350 and dexamethasone-induced transcript. The region of association identified on 18p11 maps to a single gene, PTPN2.

Our scan found associations with SNPs within the chromosome 10p15 region containing CD25, encoding the high-affinity receptor for IL-2. This region contains the genes encoding both IL-2 and IL-21. Together with studies in the mouse model of T1D, our results point to the primary importance of the IL-2 pathway in T1D and other autoimmune diseases.

**Type 2 diabetes (T2D).** Type 2 diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder typically first diagnosed in the middle to late adult years. Strongly associated with obesity, the condition features defects in both the secretion and peripheral actions of insulin. λₛ is ~3.0. Heritability values vary widely with most estimates between 30 and 70%.

To date, robust, widely replicated associations are limited to variants in three genes: PPARG, KCNJ11 and TCF7L2. All three of these signals are detected here. A cluster of SNPs on chromosome 10q, within TCF7L2, represented by rs4506565 (P = 5.7 × 10⁻¹³) generates the strongest association signal for T2D. TCF7L2 acts within the WNT-signalling pathway, and effects on diabetes risk seem to be mediated predominantly through beta-cell dysfunction.

Apart from TCF7L2, the scan reveals two signals for T2D with P values less than 5 × 10⁻⁷. The first of these maps within the FTO gene on chromosome 16q. The effect of these variants on T2D-risk is mediated entirely by their marked effect on adiposity. The third association signal (chromosome 6p22) features a cluster of highly associated SNPs mapping to intron 5 of the CDKAL1 gene. CDKAL1 shares homology with CDK5 regulatory subunit associated protein 1. CDK5RAP1 is known to inhibit the activation of CDK5, which has been implicated in the maintenance of normal beta-cell function.

One notable inclusion amongst the variants with more modest association signals is a cluster of SNPs on chromosome 10 mapping in the vicinity of the HHEX and IDE genes. WTCCC data also contributed to identification of two additional robustly replicating T2D signals, mapping to the IGF2BP2 gene and CDKN2A/CDKN2B regions.

**Expanded reference group analyses.** For a fixed number of cases, power of a case-control study can be increased by enlarging the reference group. The availability of the other 6 disease data sets gave us the opportunity to expand the reference group up to a ratio of ~7.5:1. The utility of the expanded reference group approach was demonstrated by increased evidence for association at most of the loci that received strongest support from our primary analysis. additionally, this analysis elevated several loci with modest levels of statistical significance to the top tier of statistical significance (P < 5 × 10⁻⁷).

**Disease models.** It is of interest to consider which statistical models best describe the data at and between loci that are strongly associated with disease status. First, consider separately each of the 19 non-MHC SNPs showing strong evidence for association. For four of these 19, the P value on the genotypic test was smaller than that on the trend test. This supports our view that the genotypic test should be carried out in addition to the trend test. We found suggestive evidence of a departure from multilocus additivity between rs1000113 and rs10761659 in CD and between rs9465871 and rs4506565 in T2D.

# Methods

Case series came from previously established collections with nationally representative recruitment: 2,000 samples were genotyped for each. The control samples came from two sources: half from the 1958 Birth Cohort and the remainder from a new UK Blood Service sample. The latter collection was established specifically for this study and is a UK national repository of anonymized DNA samples from 3,622 consenting blood donors. The vast majority of subjects were self-reported as of European Caucasian ancestry. All DNA samples were requantified and tested for degradation and PCR amplification. Genotyping was performed using GeneChip 500K arrays at the Affymetrix Services Lab. CEL files were transferred to WTCCC for quantile normalization, and genotypes called using a new genotyping algorithm, CHIAMO, developed for this project. QC/QA measures included sample call rate, overall heterozygosity and evidence of non-European ancestry (809 samples excluded; 16,179 retained for analysis). SNPs were excluded from analysis because of missing data rates, departures from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and other metrics (31,011 excluded; 469,557 retained). Standard 1-d.f. and 2-d.f. tests of case-control association were supplemented with bayesian approaches, multilocus methods (data imputation) and analyses with combined data sets, either as additional cases or as an expanded reference group.

BD phenotype description. BD cases were all over the age of 16 yr, living in mainland UK and of European descent. Individuals who had been in contact with mental health services were recruited if they suffered with a major mood disorder in which clinically significant episodes of elevated mood had occurred. This was defined as a lifetime diagnosis of a bipolar mood disorder according to Research Diagnostic Criteria and included the bipolar subtypes: bipolar I disorder (71% cases), schizoaffective disorder bipolar type (15% cases), bipolar II disorder (9% cases) and manic disorder (5% cases). After providing written informed consent, all subjects were interviewed by a trained psychologist or psychiatrist using a semi-structured lifetime diagnostic psychiatric interview. Best-estimate ratings were made for a set of key phenotypic measures on the basis of the OPCRIT checklist.

CAD phenotype description. CAD cases had a validated history of either myocardial infarction or coronary revascularization before their 66th birthday. Verification of the history of CAD was required either from hospital records or the primary care physician. Recruitment was carried out on a national basis in the UK. Although the majority of subjects had at least one further sib also affected with premature CAD, only one subject from each family was included in the present study.

CD phenotype description. CD cases were attendees at inflammatory bowel disease clinics. Ascertainment was based on a confirmed diagnosis of Crohn's disease (CD) using conventional endoscopic, radiological and histopathological criteria. We included all subtypes of CD as classified by disease extent and behaviour. The median age of diagnosis was 26.1 yr and 62% of the collection had undergone CD-related abdominal surgery. Only one affected individual was included per family.

HT phenotype description. HT cases comprised severely hypertensive probands ascertained from families with multiplex affected sibships or as parent-offspring trios. They were of white British ancestry. Each case had a history of hypertension diagnosed before 60 yr of age, with confirmed blood pressure recordings corresponding to seated levels > 150/100 mmHg (if based on one reading), or the mean of 3 readings greater than 145/95 mm Hg. We excluded hypertensive individuals who self-reportedly consumed > 21 units of alcohol per week and those with diabetes, intrinsic renal disease, a history of secondary hypertension or coexisting illness.

RA phenotype description. RA cases were recruited to studies coordinated by the ARC (Arthritis Research Campaign) Epidemiology Unit. All subjects were Caucasian over the age of 18 yr and satisfied the 1987 American College of Rheumatology Criteria for RA modified for genetic studies. Samples for WTCCC were selected from the various studies on the basis of the quality and availability of DNA.

T1D phenotype description. T1D cases were recruited from paediatric and adult diabetes clinics at 150 National Health Service hospitals across mainland UK. To establish a positive diagnosis of T1D, we required all cases to have an age of diagnosis below 17 yr and insulin dependence since diagnosis (with a minimum period of at least 6 months). subjects suffering from rare monogenic disorders were excluded.

T2D phenotype description. The T2D cases were selected from UK Caucasian subjects. In each case, the diagnosis of diabetes was based on current treatment or historical laboratory evidence of hyperglycaemia. Other forms of diabetes were excluded by standard clinical criteria. Criteria for excluding autoimmune diabetes included absence of first-degree relatives with T1D, an interval of ≥ 1 yr between diagnosis and institution of regular insulin therapy and negative testing for antibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (anti-GAD). Cases were limited to those who reported that all four grandparents had exclusively British and/or Irish origin. All were diagnosed between age 25 and 75.

1958 Birth Cohort Controls (58BC). The 1958 Birth Cohort includes all births in England, Wales and Scotland, during one week in 1958. DNA samples extracted from 1,500 cell lines of self-reported white ethnicity were selected for use as controls. UK Blood Services Controls (UKBS). The second set of common controls was made up of 1,500 individuals selected from a sample of blood donors recruited as part of the current project. DNA was extracted from mononuclear cells.

Sample handling. Each participating sample collection supplied 10 μg aliquots of anonymized samples. On receipt, samples had their DNA concentration measured and were checked for DNA degradation. Samples with concentrations ≥ 50 ng/μl, showing limited or no degradation, were deemed fit for whole genome genotyping. We selected 2,000 and 1,500 samples from each disease and control collection respectively. Selected samples were normalized to 50 ng/μl and re-arrayed robotically into 96-well plates. For each collection, the selected samples were balanced for sex and geographical region.

Genotyping. SNP genotyping was performed with the commercial release of the GeneChip 500K arrays. two aliquots of 250 ng of DNA each are digested with Nsp I and Sty I, respectively, an adaptor is ligated and molecules are then fragmented and labelled. Each enzyme preparation is hybridized to the corresponding SNP array. Individual arrays not passing the 93% call rate threshold were repeated. CEL files provided the intensities of the various probes on each chip.

Power calculations. We assessed power of the Affymetrix 500K chip using a simulation experiment. Separately for each SNP with MAF > 5%, we assumed the SNP was causative and simulated genotype data at all SNPs in the same region in case-control panels of 2,000 cases and 3,000 controls. Power estimates are then calculated as the proportion of putative disease SNPs that are detected at the given P-value threshold.

CHIAMO. We developed a new genotype calling algorithm, CHIAMO, which is applied after quantile normalization of the data from each sample. Normalized intensities for each genotype were mapped to a two-dimensional intensity vector. CHIAMO uses a bayesian hierarchical 4-class mixture model to call genotypes for the whole project. All CHIAMO genotype calls analysed in this paper were based on an a posteriori probability threshold of 0.9. CHIAMO improved both call rate and accuracy in comparison to BRLMM.

Quantile-quantile plots. Q-Q plots are constructed by ranking a set of values of a statistic and plotting them against their expected values. Deviations from the line of equality indicate either that the theoretical distribution is incorrect, or that the sample is contaminated with values generated in some other manner. We have also calculated 95% 'concentration bands'.

Data quality control. A total of 809 samples were excluded from the analysis. Missing data rate per sample acts as an indicator of low DNA quality. Most samples had very low rates of missing data and we chose to exclude 250 samples with > 3% missing data. We also set empirical thresholds on genome-wide heterozygosity. Six samples with > 30% heterozygosity and a further three with < 23% heterozygosity were excluded. We excluded 16 samples with discrepancies between WTCCC information and external identifying information. We sought to detect individuals with non-Caucasian ancestry using multi-dimensional scaling. We excluded 153 samples that were clearly separate. We excluded 26,567 SNPs with a study-wide missing data rate > 5%, or > 1% for SNPs with a study-wide MAF < 5%. We additionally excluded 4,351 SNPs with Hardy-Weinberg exact P value < 5.7 × 10⁻⁷ in the combined set of controls, and 93 SNPs with P value < 5.7 × 10⁻⁷ for association between the two control groups. In total, 469,557 SNPs passed the quality control filters.

Comparing linkage disequilibrium. Initial analyses suggest that patterns of linkage disequilibrium in our samples are very similar to those in HapMap. We calculated r² values directly from the phased haplotypes available in HapMap, but using unphased genotype data from our study.

Geographical variation and population structure. Principal component analysis was performed to identify components that reflected genome-wide structure. The correlation estimates were based on a subset of 197,175 SNPs and specifically excluded the MHC region. To assess the level of over-dispersion in each collection we filtered out all SNPs that had a clear genotype-calling problem. Around 360,000 SNPs passed these filters. Estimates of λ were calculated using an estimator based on the median test statistic.

Bayes factors. The Bayes factor (BF) provides a single measure of the strength of the evidence for an association. Calculation of Bayes factors requires assumptions about effect sizes. We use M₀ to denote a model of no association, M₁ for a model with an additive effect on the log-odds scale and M₂ for a general 3 parameter model of association. At each SNP we calculate two Bayes factors.

Sex-differentiated tests. We examined the possibility of differential genetic effects in males and females by reapplying the two single-locus analyses separately in males and females and combining the results. This test is sensitive to association that is of a different magnitude and/or direction in the two sexes.

X Chromosome analysis. The X chromosome needs to be treated differently from the autosomes. Sample sizes and hence power are different. We took the view that, because most loci on the X chromosome are subject to X chromosome inactivation, it is more logical to treat males as if they were homozygous females. Thus we score female genotypes 0, 1 or 2 and male genotypes 0 or 2.

Multilocus analysis. We use the genotype data of this study, the HapMap data, and a population genetics model, to simulate genotypes at the HapMap SNPs that are not on the Affymetrix 500K chip. Informally, we determine which haplotypes are present in each individual in a region, and then use HapMap to 'fill in' these haplotypes at untyped SNPs. These 'in silico' genotypes are then tested for association with the disease as before. stringently, quality control filters were applied to genomic regions where imputed SNPs were responsible for a strong signal for association.

Disease models. To test for deviations from additivity at a locus we fit a logistic regression model. For the pairwise interaction analysis, we fixed the marginal model at each locus on the basis of the single locus analysis. We compared the two locus model with these marginals and no interaction terms with a larger model including interactions.

Software. Several software packages were developed within the WTCCC for data analysis, data management and simulation studies. CHIAMO uses a hierarchical statistical model, which allows it to simultaneously call genotypes at all data samples. To perform genome-wide association analysis we developed two software packages: snpMatrix and SNPTEST. Genotypes at SNPs that are in HapMap but not on the Affymetrix 500K chip were imputed using the program IMPUTE.

# Discussion

We have studied seven common familial diseases by genome-wide association analysis in 16,179 individuals. Our findings inform understanding of the genetic basis of the diseases concerned and provide methodological insights relevant to the pursuit of GWA studies in general.

A simple but important observation is that GWA analysis provides a highly effective approach for exploring the genetic underpinnings of common familial diseases. Our yield of novel, highly significant association findings is comparable to, or exceeds, the number of those hitherto-generated by candidate gene or positional cloning efforts. For many of the compelling signals, replication has already been obtained. Additional findings of particular interest include the identification of several loci that seem to influence susceptibility to multiple autoimmune diseases, and the suggestion of a novel locus for RA which shows sex-specific effects.

Our study enables us to make several general recommendations relevant to GWA studies. The first relates to the importance of careful quality control. In such large data sets, small systematic differences can readily produce effects capable of obscuring the true associations being sought. We implemented extensive quality control checks to minimize differences in sample DNA concentration, quality and handling procedures and combined a new genotype-calling algorithm with a set of filtering heuristics. systematic visual inspection of cluster plots for SNPs of interest remains an integral part of the quality control process.

The potential for population structure to undermine inferences in case-control association studies has long been debated but limited empirical data have been available to assess the issue. Our study highlighted several loci which demonstrate substantial geographical variation in allele frequencies across Britain, most probably due to natural selection in ancestral populations. Outside these loci, the effects of population structure are relatively minor, and do not represent a major source of confounding, provided that individuals with appreciable non-European ancestry are excluded. This finding reinforces the logistical and economic benefits of the case-control design over alternatives.

Our study allowed us to address another important methodological issue: the adequacy of using a common set of controls. our study demonstrates that, within the context of large-scale genetic association studies, for British populations at least, this concern has been overstated. The loss of power due to misclassification bias is modest unless the trait of interest is very common. the present study provides a compelling case for both the suitability and efficiency of the common control design in Britain and warrants its serious consideration elsewhere.

In terms of general biological insights, the most profound relate to inferences about the allelic architecture of common traits. The novel variants we have uncovered are characterized by modest effect size and even these estimates are likely to be inflated. We identified no additional common variants of very large effect. The observed distribution of effect sizes is consistent with models that suggest that, for any given trait, there will be few large effects, a handful of modest effects and a substantial number of genes generating small or very small increases in disease risk.

There are several important corollaries. most of the susceptibility effects yet to be uncovered for these diseases are likely to have effects of similar or smaller magnitude to those we have highlighted. Beyond the signals with the strongest evidence for association, there will be many additional susceptibility variants for which the WTCCC provides some evidence, but for which extensive replication will be required. even variants of very small effect can offer fundamental biological insights.

The patterns of allelic architecture uncovered mean that replication efforts will need to feature comparably large sample sizes. Caution is required in reaching negative conclusions on the basis of a single failed attempt at replication, or any set of replication attempts that are inadequately powered.

One of our major design considerations was sample size. our results suggest that such large sample sizes were necessary. Even with 2,000 cases and 3,000 controls, adequate power is restricted to common variants of relatively large effect. the larger the study sample, the more loci can be expected to reach threshold significance values. indeed, there are strong grounds for the prosecution of GWA studies on an even larger scale than ours, and, wherever possible, combining the results from existing GWA scans performed for the same trait.

In our study, T1D and CD, the conditions showing strongest familial aggregation generated the largest number of highly significant associations. it is important to recognize that the association signals so far identified account for only a small proportion of overall familiality. There is a disparity in scale between the modest locus-specific λₛ effects attributable to the identified associations and the estimates of overall familiality. These estimates demonstrate the limited potential of the variants thus far identified to provide clinically useful prediction of disease.

The identification and characterization of the aetiological variants that underlie replicated associations will necessitate extensive fine-mapping and functional validation. We view the WTCCC study and data set as an important first step towards harnessing the powerful molecular genomic tools now available to dissect the biological basis of common disease and translating those findings into improvements in human health.
