# Abstract

In vitro-transcribed mRNAs encoding physiologically important proteins have considerable potential for therapeutic applications. However, in its present form, mRNA is unfeasible for clinical use because of its labile and immunogenic nature. Here, we investigated whether incorporation of naturally modified nucleotides into transcripts would confer enhanced biological properties to mRNA. We found that mRNAs containing pseudouridines have a higher translational capacity than unmodified mRNAs when tested in mammalian cells and lysates or administered intravenously into mice at 0.015-0.15 mg/kg doses. The delivered mRNA and the encoded protein could be detected in the spleen at 1, 4, and 24 hours after the injection, where both products were at significantly higher levels when pseudouridine-containing mRNA was administered. Even at higher doses, only the unmodified mRNA was immunogenic, inducing high serum levels of interferon-alpha (IFNα). These findings indicate that nucleoside modification is an effective approach to enhance stability and translational capacity of mRNA while diminishing its immunogenicity in vivo. Improved properties conferred by pseudouridine make such mRNA a promising tool for both gene replacement and vaccination.

# Introduction

In vitro-synthesized mRNA seems an ideal nonviral gene replacement tool with many inherent advantages, including rapid protein production and efficient transduction of primary cells. mRNA-based therapy also avoids deleterious side effects (e.g., integration into chromosomes) that limit clinical application of most virus- and DNA-based vectors. The first in vivo gene transfer therapy using mRNA was reported in 1990. Subsequently, however, mRNA has rarely been used for introducing genetic material into animals or even into cultured cells. The use of mRNA has been mostly limited to vaccination in which antigen-encoding transcripts were administered in vivo or delivered to dendritic cells (DCs) ex vivo in order to induce cellular and humoral immune responses. However, RNA is unsuitable for gene replacement because of its high immunogenicity and low effectiveness.

Recent studies have demonstrated that RNA activates cells of the innate immune system by stimulating Toll-like receptors (TLRs), specifically TLR3, TLR7, and TLR8. However, when naturally occurring modified nucleosides, for example, pseudouridine (Ψ), 5-methylcytidine (m5C), N6-methyladenosine (m6A), 5-methyluridine (m5U), or 2-thiouridine (s2U) were incorporated into the transcript, most of the TLRs were no longer activated. The immunostimulatory potential of such RNAs as measured by proinflammatory cytokine release and induction of co-stimulatory molecules was greatly diminished. Hartmann et al. also reported that modified nucleosides, including s2U and Ψ, abrogated 5'-triphosphate RNA-mediated activation of another RNA-responsive immune sensor, retinoic acid-inducible protein I (RIG-I). If any of the in vitro transcripts containing nucleoside modifications would remain translatable and also avoid immune activation in vivo, such an mRNA could be developed into a new therapeutic tool for both gene replacement and vaccination. Accordingly, in this report, we tested the nucleoside-modified mRNAs for their translational potentials and in vivo immune characteristics.

Our results reveal that incorporating pseudouridine, a naturally occurring modified nucleoside, into mRNA not only suppresses RNA-mediated immune activation in vitro and in vivo, but also enhances the translational capacity of the RNA. These characteristics and the ease of generating such an RNA by in vitro transcription make Ψ-containing mRNA a unique tool for expression of any protein in vitro and in vivo.

# Main

## In vitro transcription and translation of nucleoside-modified mRNAs

In nature, RNA is synthesized from adenosine triphosphate, uridine triphosphate, cytidine triphosphate, and guanosine triphosphate. After transcription, selected nucleosides become modified. Due to technical limitations, at present, the simplest method to generate RNA with modified nucleosides is to perform in vitro transcription reactions in which one of the four basic nucleotide triphosphates is replaced with a corresponding modified nucleotide triphosphate. In these transcripts, one particular nucleotide is substituted with the modified nucleotide at every position. In a series of transcription reactions using reporter protein-encoding plasmids and RNA polymerases, we obtained full-length transcripts containing Ψ, m5U, s2U, m6A, or m5C. Under similar transcriptional conditions, we were unable to obtain full-length mRNA containing other naturally occurring nucleosides such as N1-methylguanosine, N1-methyladenosine, N7-methylguanosine, 2'-O-methyluridine, and 2'-O-methylcytidine.

First, a set of nucleoside-modified mRNAs encoding firefly luciferase (TEVlucA50) and Renilla luciferase (capRen) was tested to determine whether they were translated in rabbit reticulocyte lysates. By measuring the enzyme activity of the encoded proteins, we were surprised to find that Ψ-containing mRNA translated more efficiently than its unmodified counterpart, resulting in twice as much protein from both TEVlucA50 and capRen templates. The translational yield of mRNAs with m5U or m5C was similar to the unmodified transcripts, while mRNAs containing s2U translated poorly. The presence of m6A in mRNAs completely abolished their translatability. The Ψ-mediated translational enhancement was not observed in all translational systems. In wheat germ extracts, approximately 50% less protein was produced from the Ψ-containing mRNAs compared with unmodified mRNAs, while in bacterial cell lysates, mRNAs with Ψ-modifications were not translated. Analyses of radiolabeled translational products generated in reticulocyte lysates confirmed that lack of luciferase activities in samples programmed with s2U- and m6A-containing mRNAs were indeed due to lack of translation rather than loss of enzyme activity as a result of amino acid misincorporation caused by the modified nucleosides. Although Ψ has not been found in any mRNA, its ability to form hydrogen bonds with adenosine is similar to that of uridine, a structural characteristic that should allow efficient translation of such an mRNA.

## Superior translation of pseudouridine-containing mRNAs in cultured cells

To determine whether the nucleoside-modified mRNAs are translated in cultured cells, sets of Renilla luciferase-encoding mRNAs were lipofectin complexed and delivered into 293 cells. mRNA containing Ψ translated approximately 10 times as much as unmodified mRNA, while the presence of m5C led to a fourfold enhancement. mRNAs with s2U or m6A constituents, as in the cell-free system, were poorly or not at all translated. The translational capacity of mRNA in which only 5% of the adenosines were substituted with m6A, a composition closer to that which occurs in nature, was equivalent to that of the unmodified transcript. Similar results were obtained when sets of mRNAs with nucleoside modifications were tested in primary cells, including mouse DCs, embryonic fibroblasts and splenocytes, and human DCs. Control and Ψ-containing mRNAs delivered by polyethyleneimine (PEI) gave results consistent with those obtained with lipofectin.

In all cell types, the Ψ modification conferred the highest translational yield to RNA and, because it was one of the nucleoside modifications that abolished RNA-mediated activation of primary DCs, as well as interferon (IFN) induction by RIG-I, subsequent studies focused on Ψ-modified mRNAs. To determine whether superior translation of Ψ-containing transcripts was dependent on structural elements known to enhance translation of the mRNA, a set of firefly luciferase-encoding mRNAs were synthesized with a unique 5'-untranslated sequence (TEV, a cap-independent translational enhancer), cap and/or poly(A) tail, or no additional sequences. As expected, these structural elements enhanced translational efficiency of the mRNA and presence of Ψ in the transcripts further increased the amount of protein made from all tested constructs, demonstrating that Ψ-mediated translational enhancement is independent of cap and poly(A) tail. The most efficiently translated mRNAs (capTEVlucA50) were extended with longer poly(A) tails, which is known to enhance translation, and analyzed in time-course studies. mRNA with Ψ modification was translated to a greater extent than unmodified RNA at every tested time point and, as the incubation time increased, the difference between levels of luciferase made from the two types of mRNAs also increased. Considering the short functional half-life of luciferase in mammalian cells and the fact that at 8-50 hours after transfection, cells programmed with Ψ-containing mRNA had unproportionally higher luciferase level, it is likely that Ψ-modification stabilizes the mRNA.

Routinely, β-galactosidase (lacZ)- and green fluorescent protein (GFP)-encoding constructs are used to visualize viral- or plasmid vector-mediated gene expression. Accordingly, we generated lacZ and GFP mRNAs with or without Ψ to use this detection system. To enhance translation, a subset of the RNAs was also extended with poly(A) tail. Analysis of 293 cells at 24 hours following RNA delivery demonstrated that the presence of Ψ in the mRNA significantly improved translational capacity of all tested RNA (caplacZ, caplacZ-An, and capGFP-An) as compared to the corresponding control, uridine-containing transcripts. Not only did more cells express the encoded proteins when Ψ-modified mRNAs were used, but also the cells exhibited more intense staining, suggesting higher cellular levels of those proteins. The level of GFP staining in both number of positive cells and intensity was proportional to the amounts of delivered capGFP-An RNA added to cells cultured. Transfection of GFP mRNA containing Ψ modification resulted in higher levels of GFP expression in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells as well as in cultured primary neurons from rat brain cortex.

## Superior translation of Ψ-containing mRNA is independent of RIG-I

RIG-I, a cytoplasmic sensor of pathogenic RNA, is ubiquitously present in all cells. It directs type I IFN secretion when exposed to RNA containing 5'-triphosphate; however, replacement of uridine with Ψ in RNA blocks such an activation. The RNA samples we have synthesized and analyzed, including a significant fraction of those transcribed in the presence of cap analog, contained a 5'-triphosphate. This raises the possibility that the observed translational differences between U- and Ψ-containing RNA were caused by type I IFN, secreted when RIG-I was exposed to uridine- but not to Ψ-containing RNA. To address the role of RIG-I and type I IFN in the differential translation of the two RNA types, mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from RIG-I(-/-) and wild-type mice were treated with U- or Ψ-containing mRNAs, and then translation and IFN induction were measured. Transcripts containing either 5'-triphosphates (ppplucA50) or cap (capTEVluc-An) were tested. Ψ-containing mRNA was translated at increased levels compared to U-containing mRNA independent from the presence of RIG-I. As expected, the level of IFN-β secreted by wild-type MEFs greatly diminished when the triphosphates were replaced with cap at the 5'-ends of U-containing RNAs.

Most important, the U-containing mRNA did not induce IFN-β from the RIG-I(-/-) MEFs but was still translated less efficiently than Ψ-containing mRNA, making unlikely that translational differences were mediated by RIG-I-induced IFN actions.

## Efficient translation of Ψ-containing mRNA in mice

For in vivo studies, we used firefly luciferase-encoding mRNA because, unlike other reporter enzymes (e.g., β-galactosidase, Renilla luciferase), no endogenous mammalian enzyme interferes with its detection. The transcripts, unmodified and Ψ-modified capTEVlucA50, were extended with approximately 200-nt long poly(A) tails to increase their translatability. mRNAs were lipofectin complexed and injected into mice through their caudal veins. Intravenous administration of 0.3-μg capTEVluc-An containing Ψ resulted in high luciferase activity in the spleen, but not in the lung, liver, heart, kidney, or brain, thus in subsequent studies only spleens were examined. Before analysis, spleens were bisected with one-half used for luciferase enzyme measurements and the other half for RNA isolation and subsequent northern blotting. First, the efficacies of Ψ-modified and unmodified capTEVluc-An mRNAs at 0.015 mg/kg (0.3 μg/animal) dose were compared in time-course experiments. Luciferase activity was readily detectable at 1 hour, peaked at 4 hours, and declined by 24 hours after mRNA administration. At 1 and 4 hours, significantly more (up to 12-fold) luciferase activity was detected in animals that received the Ψ-modified mRNA compared to those injected with the unmodified mRNA. By 24 hours, the only samples with detectable levels of luciferase (fourfold above background) were from animals injected with Ψ-containing mRNA. The overall expression patterns were similar when mRNAs encoding Renilla luciferase (capRen with or without Ψ modifications) were injected into the animals or when isolated mouse splenocytes were exposed to mRNAs in culture. Northern analyses of splenic RNA revealed that the administered mRNAs, in their intact and partially degraded forms, were readily detectable at 15 minutes, 1 hour, and 4 hours postinjection.

## Ψ-Modified mRNA is nonimmunogenic in mice

We recently demonstrated that unmodified RNA, in contrast to Ψ-modified RNA, activated human DCs to secrete IFN-α and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). In order to demonstrate whether Ψ-modified RNA activated the innate immune system after in vivo systemic delivery, serum samples were collected from animals at 6 hours postinjection and tested for proinflammatory cytokines. We found high IFN-α levels only in those animals that were injected with 3.0 μg of unmodified capTEVluc-An, but not with the Ψ-modified capTEVluc-An. Although TNF-α protein was below the detection level in the collected serum samples, northern blot analysis demonstrated the highest amount of TNF-α mRNA in the spleen of animals that were administered unmodified mRNA at 4 hours postinjection.

# Discussion

Progress in understanding the molecular details of many human diseases and instant access to human gene collections brings the possibility of using genes for treatment closer to reality. However, safe and effective gene therapy, which would take advantage of all these recent achievements, is still lacking. Unlike viral- and plasmid-based vectors, in vitro-transcribed mRNAs have never been vigorously tested for in vivo gene replacement, only for therapeutic vaccination because they were generally considered labile, inefficient, and immunogenic. Our most significant finding, however, demonstrates that in vitro-transcribed mRNAs containing pseudouridines possess superior translational capacities, increased biological stability, and no immunogenicity. The potential therapeutic advantages of using mRNA, especially Ψ-containing mRNA, over plasmid and viral vectors for delivering genetic material are numerous: (i) improved safety, because RNA is inherently incapable of integrating into the genome, thus preventing deleterious side effects that have stalled other vectors; (ii) lack of inflammatory response to Ψ-containing mRNA, thereby avoiding devastating systemic inflammation that can be fatal with a viral vector; (iii) efficient transduction of primary cells, unlike DNA, RNA does not require cell proliferation for expression of the encoded protein; (iv) rapid protein expression, mRNAs are translated within minutes following entry into the cytoplasm, whereas plasmids require time-consuming nuclear import and transcription; (v) virtually no size limit for the encoded proteins, because long mRNAs can be easily obtained, unlike viral vectors that possess limited packaging capacities; (vi) the extent and duration of the encoded protein expression can be closely controlled because mRNAs have shorter half lives and, unlike other vectors, do not replicate.

Our most surprising result is that mRNAs with Ψ modification have a higher translational capacity than those without modification in all tested mammalian systems. Although further studies are needed to understand the reason for this difference fully, using RIG-I(-/-) MEFs, we excluded a role for RIG-I and type I IFN in this phenomenon. It is possible that protein synthesis might be inhibited by RNA-dependent protein kinase activated by structural motifs present in mRNA-containing uridine but not Ψ modification. Consistent with this interpretation, attenuated translation of nonmodified mRNAs as compared to Ψ-modified mRNAs was observed in mammalian cells and lysates that contain RNA-dependent protein kinase but not observed in wheat germ extracts, which have no RNA-dependent protein kinase.

A likely contributing factor to the enhanced translation observed with Ψ modification is an increase in biological stability of the mRNAs. Indeed, higher resistance to hydrolysis by phosphodiesterases from snake venom and spleen has been reported when uridine was replaced with Ψ in dinucleotide substrates. Previous studies have also demonstrated that Ψ stabilizes RNA secondary structures by promoting base stacking, which could slow degradation. However, stability of mRNAs containing either uridines or pseudouridines was the same when tested by in vitro assays using human skin-associated RNases. Enhanced translation might be another factor that improves stability by protecting the RNA with high ribosome occupancy.

From a potential adverse event standpoint, it is important to note that Ψ, a natural constituent of RNA, likely lacks toxicity. In fact, Ψ is the most common modification found in RNA and natural pathways for metabolism of Ψ-modified mRNA and subsequent disposal into the urine exist.

In previous studies, we demonstrated that bacterial RNA and in vitro transcripts without modified nucleoside constituents stimulated human TLR3, TLR7, and TLR8, while mammalian RNA and in vitro transcripts containing nucleoside modifications including Ψ were minimally or nonstimulatory. We also observed high levels of TNF-α and IFN-α secretion by human primary DCs when exposed to RNAs that lacked nucleoside modification, but not when Ψ-modified RNAs were used. Because mammalian RNA, unlike bacterial RNA, abundantly possesses modified nucleosides, these results collectively demonstrate that nucleoside modifications suppress RNA immunogenicity. This study extends these findings to in vivo conditions by showing induction of IFN-α secretion and an increase of TNF-α mRNA in mice following administration of unmodified, but not Ψ modified, mRNA.

In summary, we demonstrate that mRNA containing Ψ is a new and effective vector to deliver genetic material for protein expression into both cultured cells and animals. The presence of Ψ in mRNA improved its translational capacity and overall stability. It also diminished its immunogenicity in vivo. Administering Ψ-containing mRNA at very low doses (0.015 mg/kg) resulted in robust expression of the encoded protein. We identified spleen as the target organ where the intravenously delivered, lipofectin-complexed mRNA and its encoded protein accumulate. These collective findings are important steps in developing the therapeutic potential of mRNA, such as using modified mRNA as an alternative to conventional vaccination and as a means for expressing clinically beneficial proteins in vivo safely and effectively.

# Methods

## mRNA synthesis and characterization
For templates, reporter plasmids encoding firefly luciferase (pTEVluc, pTEVlucA50, pLuc, and pLucA50), Renilla luciferase (pSVren), bacterial β-galactosidase (placZ), and enhanced GFP (peGFP) were used. Plasmid peGFP was generated by inserting coding sequences from pEGFP-N3 into the EcoRV site of pT7TS containing the corresponding 5'- and 3'-untranslated region sequences of Xenopus β-globin mRNA and a stretch of dA30dC30. First, plasmids were linearized with BamHI, NdeI, SspI, or XbaI/SalI to generate templates. Transcriptions were performed at 37 °C for 3 hours using T7 or SP6 RNA polymerases and nucleotide triphosphates at 7.5 mmol/l final concentration. To obtain mRNAs with modified nucleosides, the transcription reaction was assembled with the replacement of one nucleotide triphosphate with the corresponding triphosphate derivative of the following modified nucleosides: 5-methylcytidine (m5C), 5-methyluridine (m5U), 2-thiouridine (s2U), N6-methyladenosine (m6A), pseudouridine (Ψ), N1-methylguanosine (m1G), N1-methyladenosine (m1A), 2'-O-methyluridine (Um), 2'-O-methylcytidine (Cm), or N7-methylguanosine (m7G). Where noted, only 5% of the adenosine triphosphate was replaced with N6-methyladenosine triphosphates in the reaction (5% m6A mRNA). Capped mRNAs were generated by supplementing the transcription reactions with 6 mmol/l 3'-O-Me-m7GpppG, a nonreversible cap analog, and lowering the concentration of guanosine triphosphate (3.75 mmol/l). Selected mRNAs were also poly(A) tailed.

## In vitro translation assay
Aliquots of rabbit reticulocyte lysates, wheat germ extracts, or Escherichia coli S30 extracts were programmed with TEVlucA50 or capRen mRNAs and incubated for 60 minutes at 30, 25, or 37 °C, respectively. Using cell culture lysis reagent, the translation was stopped and aliquots were analyzed for enzyme activities using firefly and Renilla luciferase assay systems and a luminometer at 10-second measuring time. Using recombinant firefly luciferase, a standard curve was determined to be linear. In selected experiments, the capRen-programmed rabbit reticulocyte lysates were also supplemented with 35S-methionine. At the end of incubation, aliquots were removed to analyze the labeled Renilla luciferase by 15% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.

## Cells
Human embryonic kidney 293 cells and dihydrofolate reductase(-/-) CHO cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection. Splenocytes were isolated from mouse (C57Bl/6) spleens using a cell strainer and ACK lysis buffer. Embryonic fibroblasts from wild-type and RIG-I(-/-) mice, 293 cells, and splenocytes were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with glutamine and 10% fetal calf serum. CHO cells were cultured in Iscove's modified Dulbecco's medium supplemented with hypoxanthine, thymidine, and 10% fetal calf serum. Murine DCs were generated from bone marrow cells of femurs and tibia of 6- to 9-week-old BALB/c mice. The cells were cultured in RPMI containing glutamine, 10% fetal calf serum, and 50 ng/ml muGM-CSF. Primary cortical culture was prepared from brain neocortices of E19 rat embryos, cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 10% Ham's F12 with glutamine, and 50 U/ml penicillin-streptomycin.

## Assembling the RNA complex
Lipofectin and mRNA were complexed in phosphate buffer that has been shown to enhance transfection in vitro and in vivo. To assemble a 50-μl complex of RNA-lipofectin, first potassium phosphate buffer containing bovine serum albumin was added to DMEM, then lipofectin was mixed in and the sample was incubated for 10 minutes. In a separate tube, RNA was added to DMEM. Diluted RNA was added to the lipofectin mix and incubated for 10 minutes. Finally, the RNA-lipofectin complex was further diluted by adding DMEM. Fifty microliter of such a complex was used to transfect cells present in 1 well of a 96-well plate. RNA was complexed with PEI according to the manufacturer's instructions.

## Detection of reporter proteins in RNA-transfected cultured cells
A day before transfection, cells were seeded into 96-well plates. MEFs and 293 cells were seeded at 5.0 x 10^4 cells/well density, murine splenocytes and DCs at 4 x 10^5 and 3 x 10^4 cells/well, respectively. Unless stated otherwise, cells were exposed to DMEM containing lipofectin-complexed RNA (0.25 μg) for 1 hour, which was then replaced with complete medium and further cultured. Cells were lysed and luciferase activities were measured. For visualizing β-galactosidase activity, cells were processed using X-gal staining. Expression of GFP in 293, CHO, and neurons was documented using inverted epifluorescent microscope.

## Administering mRNA to mice
Animal studies were performed in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Pennsylvania. Female BALB/c mice were intravenously injected with lipofectin-complexed mRNA (0.3, 1.0, or 3.0 μg capTEVluc-An or 3.0 μg pCMVluc). Mice were killed when indicated (1, 4, 6, or 24 hours), and their spleens and blood were harvested. The spleens were bisected and processed immediately. One-half was homogenized for luciferase measurements and the other half for RNA isolation.

## Cytokine detection
Serum samples collected from mice 6 hours following lipofectin-complexed administration were analyzed for mouse IFN-α and TNF-α. Culture medium collected from RIG-I(-/-) and wild-type MEFs at 24 hours after transfection were assayed for mouse IFN-β.

## Northern blot analysis
Aliquots of RNA samples isolated from spleen were separated by denaturing agarose gel electrophoresis, transferred to charged membranes and hybridized. Plasmids containing firefly luciferase, rat-specific β-actin, and rat-specific TNF-α cDNAs were used to gel-purify inserts for probes. The specificity of all probes was confirmed by sequencing. Hybridized membranes were exposed to film.
