# Abstract

Differentiated cells can be reprogrammed to an embryonic-like state by transfer of nuclear contents into oocytes or by fusion with embryonic stem (ES) cells. Little is known about factors that induce this reprogramming. Here, we demonstrate induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse embryonic or adult fibroblasts by introducing four factors, Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4, under ES cell culture conditions. Unexpectedly, Nanog was dispensable. These cells, which we designated iPS (induced pluripotent stem) cells, exhibit the morphology and growth properties of ES cells and express ES cell marker genes. Subcutaneous transplantation of iPS cells into nude mice resulted in tumors containing a variety of tissues from all three germ layers. Following injection into blastocysts, iPS cells contributed to mouse embryonic development. These data demonstrate that pluripotent stem cells can be directly generated from fibroblast cultures by the addition of only a few defined factors.

# Introduction

Embryonic stem (ES) cells, which are derived from the inner cell mass of mammalian blastocysts, have the ability to grow indefinitely while maintaining pluripotency and the ability to differentiate into cells of all three germ layers. Human ES cells might be used to treat a host of diseases, such as Parkinson's disease, spinal cord injury, and diabetes. However, there are ethical difficulties regarding the use of human embryos, as well as the problem of tissue rejection following transplantation in patients. One way to circumvent these issues is the generation of pluripotent cells directly from the patients' own cells.

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed by transferring their nuclear contents into oocytes or by fusion with ES cells, indicating that unfertilized eggs and ES cells contain factors that can confer totipotency or pluripotency to somatic cells. We hypothesized that the factors that play important roles in the maintenance of ES cell identity also play pivotal roles in the induction of pluripotency in somatic cells.

Several transcription factors, including Oct3/4, Sox2, and Nanog, function in the maintenance of pluripotency in both early embryos and ES cells. Several genes that are frequently upregulated in tumors, such as Stat3, E-Ras, c-myc, Klf4, and beta-catenin, have been shown to contribute to the long-term maintenance of the ES cell phenotype and the rapid proliferation of ES cells in culture. In addition, we have identified several other genes that are specifically expressed in ES cells.

In this study, we examined whether these factors could induce pluripotency in somatic cells. By combining four selected factors, we were able to generate pluripotent cells, which we call induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, directly from mouse embryonic or adult fibroblast cultures.

# Main

We selected 24 genes as candidates for factors that induce pluripotency in somatic cells, based on our hypothesis that such factors also play pivotal roles in the maintenance of ES cell identity. For beta-catenin, c-Myc, and Stat3, we used active forms, S33Ybeta-catenin, T58A-c-Myc, and Stat3-C, respectively. Because of the reported negative effect of Grb2 on pluripotency, we included its dominant-negative mutant Grb2 D SH2 as one of the 24 candidates.

To evaluate these 24 candidate genes, we developed an assay system in which the induction of the pluripotent state could be detected as resistance to G418. We inserted a bgeo cassette (a fusion of the beta-galactosidase and neomycin resistance genes) into the mouse Fbx15 gene by homologous recombination. Although specifically expressed in mouse ES cells and early embryos, Fbx15 is dispensable for the maintenance of pluripotency and mouse development.

ES cells homozygous for the bgeo knockin construct (Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo) were resistant to extremely high concentrations of G418 (up to 12 mg/ml), whereas somatic cells derived from Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo mice were sensitive to a normal concentration of G418 (0.3 mg/ml). We expected that even partial activation of the Fbx15 locus would result in resistance to normal concentrations of G418.

We introduced each of the 24 candidate genes into mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo embryos by retroviral transduction. Transduced cells were then cultured on STO feeder cells in ES cell medium containing G418 (0.3 mg/ml). We did not, however, obtain drug-resistant colonies with any single factor, indicating that no single candidate gene was sufficient to activate the Fbx15 locus.

In contrast, transduction of all 24 candidates together generated 22 G418-resistant colonies. Of the 12 clones for which we continued cultivating under selection, 5 clones exhibited morphology similar to ES cells, including a round shape, large nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm. We repeated the experiments and observed 29 G418-resistant colonies, from which we picked 6 colonies. Four of these clones possessed ES cell-like morphology and proliferation properties. The doubling time of these cells was equivalent to that of ES cells. We designated these cells iPS-MEF24 for ''pluripotent stem cells induced from MEFs by 24 factors.'' RT-PCR analysis revealed that the iPS-MEF24 clones expressed ES cell markers, including Oct3/4, Nanog, E-Ras, Cripto, Dax1, Zfp296, and Fgf4. Bisulfite genomic sequencing demonstrated that the promoters of Fbx15 and Nanog were demethylated in iPS cells. By contrast, the Oct3/4 promoter remained methylated in these cells. These data indicate that some combination of these 24 candidate factors induced the expression of ES cell marker genes in MEF culture.

Next, to determine which of the 24 candidates were critical, we examined the effect of withdrawal of individual factors from the pool of transduced candidate genes on the formation of G418-resistant colonies. We identified 10 factors whose individual withdrawal from the bulk transduction pool resulted in no colony formation 10 days after transduction and fewer colonies 16 days after transduction. Combination of these 10 genes alone produced more ES cell-like colonies than transduction of all 24 genes did.

We next examined the formation of colonies after withdrawal of individual factors from the 10-factor pool transduced into MEFs. G418-resistant colonies did not form when either Oct3/4 or Klf4 was removed. Removal of Sox2 resulted in only a few G418-resistant colonies. When we removed c-Myc, G418-resistant colonies did emerge, but these had a flatter, non-ES-cell-like morphology. Removal of the remaining factors did not significantly affect colony numbers. These results indicate that Oct3/4, Klf4, Sox2, and c-Myc play important roles in the generation of iPS cells from MEFs.

Combination of the four genes produced a number of G418-resistant colonies similar to that observed with the pool of 10 genes. We continued cultivation of 12 clones for each transduction and were able to establish 4 iPS-MEF4 and 5 iPS-MEF10 clones. In addition, we could generate iPS cells (iPS-MEF4wt) with wild-type c-Myc instead of the T58A mutant. These data demonstrate that iPS cells can be induced from MEF culture by the introduction of four transcription factors, Oct3/4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4.

No combination of two factors could induce the formation of G418-resistant colonies. Two combinations of three factors—Oct3/4, Sox2, and c-Myc (minus Klf4) or Klf4, Sox2, and c-Myc (minus Oct3/4)—generated a single, small colony in each case, but these could not be maintained in culture. With the combination of Oct3/4, Klf4, and Sox2 (minus c-Myc), we observed the formation of 36 G418-resistant colonies, which, however, exhibited a flat, non-ES-cell-like morphology. With the combination of Oct3/4, Klf4, and c-Myc (minus Sox2), we observed the formation of 54 G418-resistant colonies, of which we picked 6. Although all 6 clones could be maintained over several passages, the morphology of these cells (iPS-MEF3) differed from that of iPS-MEF4 and iPS-MEF10 cells, with iPS-MEF3 colonies exhibiting rough surfaces. These data indicate that the combination of Oct3/4, c-Myc, and Klf4 can activate the Fbx15 locus, but the change induced by these three factors alone is different from that seen in iPS-MEF4 or iPS-MEF10 cells.

We performed RT-PCR to examine whether ES cell marker genes were expressed in iPS cells. We used primers that would amplify transcripts of the endogenous gene but not transcripts of the transgene. iPS-MEF10 and iPS-MEF4 clones expressed the majority of marker genes, with the exception of Ecat1. The expression of several marker genes, including Oct3/4, was higher in some iPS-MEF4 and iPS-MEF10 clones than in the remaining clones. Sox2 was only expressed in one iPS-MEF10 clone. The iPS-MEF4wt clone also expressed many of the ES cell marker genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses showed that the promoters of Oct3/4 and Nanog had increased acetylation of histone H3 and decreased dimethylation of lysine 9 of histone H3. CpG dinucleotides in these promoters remained partially methylated in iPS cells. iPS-MEF4 and iPS-MEF10 cells were positive for alkaline phosphatase and SSEA-1 and showed high telomerase activity. These results demonstrate that iPS-MEF4 and iPS-MEF10 cells are similar, but not identical, to ES cells.

In iPS-MEF3 clones, Ecat1, Esg1, and Sox2 were not activated. Nanog was induced, but to a lesser extent than in iPS-MEF4 and iPS-MEF10 clones. Oct3/4 was weakly activated in some iPS-MEF3 clones but was not activated in others. By contrast, E-Ras and Fgf4 were activated more efficiently in iPS-MEF3 than in iPS-MEF10 or iPS-MEF4. These data confirm that iPS-MEF3 cells are substantially different from iPS-MEF10 and iPS-MEF4 cells.

We compared the global gene-expression profiles of ES cells, iPS cells, and MEFs using DNA microarrays. In addition, we examined MEFs in which the four factors had been introduced without G418 selection, immortalized MEFs expressing K-RasV12, and NIH 3T3 cells transformed with H-RasV12. Pearson correlation analysis revealed that iPS cells are clustered closely with ES cells but separately from fibroblasts and their derivatives. The microarray analyses identified genes that were commonly upregulated in ES cells and iPS cells, including Myb, Kit, Gdf3, and Zic3. Other genes were upregulated more efficiently in ES cells, iPS-MEF4, and iPS-MEF10 than in iPS-MEF3 clones, including Dppa3, Dppa4, Dppa5, Nanog, Sox2, Esrrb, and Rex1. Lower expression of these genes may account for the lack of pluripotency in iPS-MEF3 cells. In addition, we found genes that were upregulated more prominently in ES cells than in iPS cells, including Dnmt3a, Dnmt3b, Dnmt3l, Utf1, Tcl1, and the LIF receptor gene. These data confirm that iPS cells are similar, but not identical, to ES cells.

We examined the pluripotency of iPS cells by teratoma formation. We obtained tumors with various iPS-MEF10, iPS-MEF4, iPS-MEF4wt, and iPS-MEF3 clones after subcutaneous injection into nude mice. Histological examination revealed that several iPS-MEF10 and iPS-MEF4 clones differentiated into all three germ layers, including neural tissues, cartilage, and columnar epithelium. We confirmed differentiation into neural and muscle tissues by immunostaining and RT-PCR. By contrast, these teratomas did not express the trophoblast marker Cdx2. In contrast, all tumors derived from iPS-MEF3 clones were composed entirely of undifferentiated cells. Thus, although the three factors (Oct3/4, c-Myc, and Klf4) could induce the expression of some ES cell marker genes, they were not able to induce pluripotency.

iPS-MEF10, iPS-MEF4, and iPS-MEF3 cells formed embryoid bodies in noncoated plastic dishes. When grown in tissue culture dishes, the embryoid bodies from iPS-MEF10 and iPS-MEF4 cells attached to the dish bottom and initiated differentiation. After 3 days, immunostaining detected cells positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin (mesoderm marker), alpha-fetoprotein (endoderm marker), and beta-III tubulin (ectoderm marker). By contrast, embryoid bodies from iPS-MEF3 cells remained undifferentiated even when cultured in gelatin-coated dishes. These data confirmed pluripotency of iPS-MEF10 and iPS-MEF4 and nullipotency of iPS-MEF3 in vitro.

We next introduced the four selected factors into tail-tip fibroblasts (TTFs) of adult mice. We obtained G418-resistant colonies, from which we could establish iPS cells. We also introduced the four factors into TTFs from a mouse which also constitutively expressed green fluorescent protein (GFP). These cells were morphologically indistinguishable from ES cells. RT-PCR showed that these iPS-TTFgfp4 clones expressed the majority of ES cell marker genes at high levels.

We transplanted iPS-TTF4 and iPS-TTFgfp4 clones into nude mice, all of which produced tumors containing tissues of all three germ layers. We then introduced clones of iPS-TTFgfp4 cells into C57/BL6 blastocysts by microinjection. We obtained embryos that showed contribution of GFP-positive iPS cells. Histological analyses confirmed that iPS cells contributed to all three germ layers. These data demonstrate that the four selected factors could induce pluripotent cells from adult mouse fibroblast cultures.

We further characterized the expression of the four factors and others in iPS cells. Real-time PCR confirmed that endogenous expression of Oct3/4 and Sox2 was lower in iPS cells than in ES cells. However, the total amount of the four factors from the endogenous genes and the transgenes exceeded the normal expression levels in ES cells. In contrast, Western blot analyses showed that the total protein amounts of the four factors in iPS cells were comparable to those in ES cells. We could detect Nanog and E-Ras proteins in iPS cells, but at lower levels than those in ES cells. The p53 levels in iPS cells were lower than those in MEFs and equivalent to those in ES cells. Upon differentiation in vitro, the total mRNA expression levels of Oct3/4 and Sox2 decreased but remained much higher than in ES cells. In contrast, their protein levels decreased to comparable levels in iPS cells and ES cells.

Southern blot analyses showed that each iPS clone has a unique transgene integration pattern. Karyotyping analyses of several iPS-TTFgfp4 and iPS-TTFgfp4wt clones demonstrated that some clones showed a normal karyotype of 40XX. Finally, we found that iPS cells could not remain undifferentiated when cultured in the absence of feeder cells, even with the presence of LIF. These results, together with the different gene-expression patterns, exclude the possibility that iPS cells are merely contamination of preexisting ES cells. Finally, subclones of iPS cells were positive for alkaline phosphatase and could differentiate into all three germ layers in vitro, confirming their clonal nature.

# Discussion

Oct3/4, Sox2, and Nanog have been shown to function as core transcription factors in maintaining pluripotency. Among the three, we found that Oct3/4 and Sox2 are essential for the generation of iPS cells. Surprisingly, Nanog is dispensable. In addition, we identified c-Myc and Klf4 as essential factors. These two tumor-related factors could not be replaced by other oncogenes including E-Ras, Tcl1, beta-catenin, and Stat3.

The c-Myc protein has many downstream targets that enhance proliferation and transformation, many of which may have roles in the generation of iPS cells. Of note, c-Myc associates with histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complexes, including TRRAP, which is a core subunit of the TIP60 and GCN5 HAT complexes, CREB binding protein (CBP), and p300. Within the mammalian genome, there may be up to 25,000 c-Myc binding sites, many more than the predicted number of Oct3/4 and Sox2 binding sites. c-Myc protein may induce global histone acetylation, thus allowing Oct3/4 and Sox2 to bind to their specific target loci.

Klf4 has been shown to repress p53 directly, and p53 protein has been shown to suppress Nanog during ES cell differentiation. We found that iPS cells showed levels of p53 protein lower than those in MEFs. Thus, Klf4 might contribute to activation of Nanog and other ES cell-specific genes through p53 repression. Alternatively, Klf4 might function as an inhibitor of Myc-induced apoptosis through the repression of p53 in our system. On the other hand, Klf4 activates p21CIP1, thereby suppressing cell proliferation. This antiproliferation function of Klf4 might be inhibited by c-Myc, which suppresses the expression of p21CIP1. The balance between c-Myc and Klf4 may be important for the generation of iPS cells.

One question that remains concerns the origin of our iPS cells. With our retroviral expression system, we estimated that only a small portion of cells expressing the four factors became iPS cells. The low frequency suggests that rare tissue stem/progenitor cells that coexisted in the fibroblast cultures might have given rise to the iPS cells. Indeed, multipotent stem cells have been isolated from skin. One explanation for the low frequency of iPS cell derivation is that the four factors transform tissue stem cells. However, we found that the four factors induced iPS cells with comparably low efficiency even from bone marrow stroma, which should be more enriched in mesenchymal stem cells and other multipotent cells. Furthermore, cells induced by the three factors were nullipotent. DNA microarray analyses suggested that iPS-MEF4 cells and iPS-MEF3 cells have the same origin. These results do not favor multipotent tissue stem cells as the origin of iPS cells.

There are several other possibilities for the low frequency of iPS cell derivation. First, the levels of the four factors required for generation of pluripotent cells may have narrow ranges, and only a small portion of cells expressing all four of the factors at the right levels can acquire ES cell-like properties. Consistent with this idea, a mere 50% increase or decrease in Oct3/4 proteins induces differentiation of ES cells. iPS clones overexpressed the four factors when RNA levels were analyzed, but their protein levels were comparable to those in ES cells, suggesting that the iPS clones possess a mechanism (or mechanisms) that tightly regulates the protein levels of the four factors. We speculate that high amounts of the four factors are required in the initial stage of iPS cell generation, but, once they acquire ES cell-like status, too much of the factors are detrimental for self-renewal. Only a small portion of transduced cells show such appropriate transgene expression. Second, generation of pluripotent cells may require additional chromosomal alterations, which take place spontaneously during culture or are induced by some of the four factors. Although several iPS-TTFgfp4 clones had largely normal karyotypes, we cannot rule out the existence of minor chromosomal alterations. Site-specific retroviral insertion may also play a role. Southern blot analyses showed that each iPS clone has approximately 20 retroviral integrations. Some of these may have caused silencing or fusion with endogenous genes. Further studies will be required to determine the origin of iPS cells.

Another unsolved question is whether the four factors we identified play roles in reprogramming induced by fusion with ES cells or nuclear transfer into oocytes. Since the four factors are expressed in ES cells at high levels, it is reasonable to speculate that they are involved in the reprogramming machinery that exists in ES cells. Our result is also consistent with the finding that the reprogramming activity resides in the nucleus, but not in the cytoplasm, of ES cells. However, iPS cells were not identical to ES cells, as shown by the global gene-expression patterns and DNA methylation status. It is possible that we have missed additional important factors.

More obscure are the roles of the four factors, especially Klf4 and c-Myc, in the reprogramming observed in oocytes. Both Klf4 and c-Myc are dispensable for preimplantation mouse development. Furthermore, c-myc is not detected in oocytes. In contrast, L-myc is expressed maternally in oocytes. Klf4 and c-Myc might be compensated by these related proteins. It is highly likely that other factors are also required to induce complete reprogramming and totipotency in oocytes.

It is likely that the four factors from the transgenes are required for maintaining the iPS cells since the expression of Oct3/4 and Sox2 from the endogenous genes remained low. We intended to prove this by using transgenes flanked by two loxP sites. However, Cre-mediated recombination caused chromosomal rearrangements. Studies with conditional expression systems are required to answer this question.

We showed that the iPS cells can differentiate in vitro and in vivo even with the presence of the retroviral vectors containing the four factors. We found that Oct3/4 and Sox2 proteins decreased significantly during in vitro differentiation. Retroviral expression has been shown to be suppressed in ES cells and further silenced upon differentiation by epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation. The same mechanisms are likely to play roles in transgene repression in iPS cells. In addition, we found that iPS cells possess a mechanism (or mechanisms) that lowers protein levels of the transgenes and Nanog. The same mechanism may be enhanced during differentiation. However, silencing of Oct3/4 in some iPS cells was not complete, which may explain our inability to obtain live chimeric mice after blastocyst microinjection of iPS cells.

An unexpected finding in this study was the efficient activation of Fgf4 and Fbx15 by the combination of the three factors devoid of Sox2. It is also surprising that Nanog is dispensable for induction and maintenance of iPS cells. More detailed analyses of iPS cells will enhance our understanding of transcriptional regulation in pluripotent stem cells.

Our findings may have wider applications, as we have found that transgene reporters with other ES cell marker genes, such as Nanog, can replace the Fbx15 knockin during selection. Nevertheless, the finding is an important step in controlling pluripotency, which may eventually allow the creation of pluripotent cells directly from somatic cells of patients.

# Methods

## Mice
Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo mice were generated with 129SvJae-derived RF8 ES cells as described previously and were backcrossed to the C57/BL6 strain for at least five generations. These mice were used for primary mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) and tail-tip fibroblast (TTF) preparations. To generate Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo mice with constitutive expression of GFP, an Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo mouse was mated with an ICR mouse with the GFP transgene driven by the constitutive CAG promoter. The resulting Fbx15 bgeo/+,GFP/+ mice were intercrossed to generate Fbx15 bgeo/bgeo,GFP/GFP mice. Nude mice (BALB/Jcl-nu) were purchased from CLEA.

## Cell Culture
RF8 ES cells and iPS cells were maintained on feeder layers of mitomycin C-treated STO cells. As a source of leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), we used conditioned medium from Plat-E cell cultures that had been transduced with a LIF-encoding vector. ES and iPS cells were passaged every 3 days. Plat-E packaging cells were maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, puromycin, and blasticidin S.

For MEF isolation, uteri isolated from 13.5-day-pregnant mice were washed with PBS. The head and visceral tissues were removed from isolated embryos. The remaining bodies were washed in fresh PBS, minced, and incubated in a trypsin/EDTA solution at 37 °C. After dissociation, cells were cultured on 100 mm dishes at 37 °C with 5% CO2. MEFs were used within three passages.

To establish TTFs, the tails from adult mice were peeled, minced, and incubated in MF-start medium for 5 days. Cells that migrated out were transferred to new plates and maintained in DMEM containing 10% FBS. TTFs at passage 3 were used for iPS cell induction.

## Retroviral Infection
Plat-E cells were seeded the day before transduction. pMXs-based retroviral vectors were introduced into Plat-E cells using Fugene 6 transfection reagent. After incubation, the DNA/Fugene 6 mixture was added onto Plat-E cells. Medium was replaced 24 hours after transduction. MEFs or TTFs were seeded on mitomycin C-treated STO feeders. Supernatants containing virus were filtered and supplemented with polybrene. Target cells were incubated in the supernatants. Three days after infection, G418 was added for selection.

## Plasmid Construction
To generate pMXs-gw, a Gateway cassette was introduced into the pMXs plasmid. Mutations in beta-catenin, cmyc, and Stat3 were introduced by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis. Candidate genes were amplified by RT-PCR and cloned into pMXs-gw by LR reaction.

## Teratoma Formation and Histological Analysis
Cells were suspended in DMEM containing 10% FBS and injected subcutaneously into nude mice. Four weeks later, tumors were dissected, fixed, and embedded in paraffin. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin.

## Bisulfite Genomic Sequencing
Bisulfite treatment was performed using the CpGenome modification kit. PCR products were cloned and sequenced to determine DNA methylation status.

## Determination of Karyotypes and SSLP by PCR
Karyotypes were determined with quinacrine-Hoechst staining. PCR primer sequences for SSLP were obtained from the Mouse Genome Informatics website.

## Western Blot Analyses
Western blot was performed using primary antibodies against Oct3/4, Sox2, Klf4, c-Myc, Nanog, E-Ras, p53, and beta-actin.

## RT-PCR for Marker Genes
Reverse transcription reactions were performed followed by PCR or real-time PCR to analyze marker gene expression.

## DNA Microarray
Total RNA was labeled and hybridized to a Mouse Oligo Microarray. Data were analyzed using GeneSpring GX software.

## In Vitro Differentiation of iPS Cells
Cells were harvested and transferred to bacterial culture dishes in ES medium without LIF. Aggregated cells were then plated onto gelatin-coated dishes and stained with antibodies against alpha-smooth muscle actin, alpha-fetoprotein, or beta-III tubulin.

## Chromatin Immunoprecipitation Assay
ChIP was performed using antibodies against dimethyl K9 H3 and acetyl H3 to analyze histone modification status at promoters.

## Statistical Analyses
Data are shown as averages and standard deviations. Student's t test and ANOVA were used for statistical analysis.
