# Integrative genomics identifies MCU as an essential component of the mitochondrial calcium uniporter

# Abstract
Mitochondria from diverse organisms are capable of transporting large amounts of Ca²⁺ via a ruthenium-red-sensitive, membrane-potential-dependent mechanism called the uniporter. Although the uniporter's biophysical properties have been studied extensively, its molecular composition remains elusive. We recently used comparative proteomics to identify MICU1 (also known as CBARA1), an EF-hand-containing protein that serves as a putative regulator of the uniporter. Here, we use whole-genome phylogenetic profiling, genome-wide RNA co-expression analysis and organelle-wide protein coexpression analysis to predict proteins functionally related to MICU1. All three methods converge on a novel predicted transmembrane protein, CCDC109A, that we now call 'mitochondrial calcium uniporter' (MCU). MCU forms oligomers in the mitochondrial inner membrane, physically interacts with MICU1, and resides within a large molecular weight complex. Silencing MCU in cultured cells or in vivo in mouse liver severely abrogates mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake, whereas mitochondrial respiration and membrane potential remain fully intact. MCU has two predicted transmembrane helices, which are separated by a highly conserved linker facing the intermembrane space. Acidic residues in this linker are required for its full activity. However, an S259A point mutation retains function but confers resistance to Ru360, the most potent inhibitor of the uniporter. Our genomic, physiological, biochemical and pharmacological data firmly establish MCU as an essential component of the mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uniporter.

# Introduction
To predict proteins that are functionally related to MICU1 and essential for mitochondrial calcium (Ca²⁺) uptake, we performed three systematic computational analyses. First, we ranked all ~20,000 mammalian genes on the basis of the similarity of their phylogenetic profile to MICU1, where the phylogenetic profile of a gene is defined as the binary vector of presence or absence of its homologues across 500 evolutionarily diverse organisms. Second, we scored all ~20,000 mammalian genes for their expression similarity to MICU1 across 81 mouse cell types and tissues using a genome-wide RNA expression atlas. Third, we scored protein expression similarity between MICU1 and all ~1,100 mitochondrial proteins, based on their pattern of peptide abundance across 14 different mouse tissues. All three computational methods spotlight an unstudied protein (previously called CCDC109A, accession number NM_138357.1) that we now call 'mitochondrial calcium uniporter' (MCU). MCU, which has two predicted transmembrane domains, was first discovered in our proteomic analysis as a mitochondrial protein detected in 12 different mouse tissues. MCU, which bears no sequence similarity to MICU1, is tied as the eighth closest phylogenetic neighbour genome-wide, being either co-present or co-absent with MICU1 in 495 of 500 organisms evaluated (Hamming distance = 5). MCU is also the second highest scoring gene in the genome-wide mRNA co-expression analysis and is the top scoring protein amongst all ~1,100 mitochondrial proteins for protein coexpression with MICU1 across 14 mouse tissues.

Our prediction of a functional relationship between MICU1 and MCU was further corroborated by evidence of a physical interaction. By transfecting green-fluorescent-protein-tagged MCU (MCU-GFP) into cells stably expressing V5-tagged MICU1 (MICU1-V5) and vice versa, we were able to recover both GFP-tagged proteins following immunoprecipitation with an anti-V5 antibody. The interaction was specific as MICU1-V5 was incapable of pulling down two different GFP-tagged inner membrane proteins (UCP2 and MFRN2, also known as SLC25A28). Similar results were also obtained by immunoprecipitating Flag-tagged MCU and probing for endogenous MICU1.

Collectively, our three complementary genomic analyses combined with our biochemical data predict that MCU is functionally related to MICU1 and that it, too, may participate in mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake.

# Main
We evaluated the impact of silencing MCU on mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake in intact and permeabilized cells using RNA interference (RNAi). Silencing MCU in a HeLa cell line expressing a mitochondria-targeted aequorin (mt-Aeq) reporter attenuates mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake proportionate to the strength of knockdown. The RNAi-induced phenotype is not off-target because coexpression of a full-length MCU cDNA together with a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) that targets the MCU 3' untranslated region (3' UTR) fully rescues Ca²⁺ uptake. Moreover, the RNAi effect is not a trivial consequence of interrupting upstream signalling, because histamine mobilization of cytosolic Ca²⁺ remains intact, and because we obtain similar results when measuring clearance of exogenously added Ca²⁺ by mitochondria in permeabilized HEK-293 and HeLa cells. In HeLa cells, basal and uncoupled respiration were intact, mitochondrial membrane potential (ψm) was not depolarized, and mitochondrial morphology remained grossly unchanged after silencing of MCU. Basal cytosolic Ca²⁺ levels were 53.9 nM ± 16.3 (n = 30) in MCU knockdown HeLa cells and 70.9 nM ± 11.7 (n = 14) in control sh-LACZ cells. Although mitochondrial Ca²⁺ buffering is known to shape cytosolic Ca²⁺ transients in many cell types, its inhibition through silencing of MCU did not show a significant impact on cytosolic Ca²⁺ clearance after histamine stimulation. However, this result could reflect an incomplete silencing of MCU-mediated mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake in HeLa cells. Mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake has also previously been shown to stimulate ATP production by allosterically activating three tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle dehydrogenases. Using a previously reported protocol, we found that permeabilized sh-MCU cells exhibit attenuated NAD(P)H elevation in response to exogenously added Ca²⁺, demonstrating that silencing MCU, like MICU1, attenuates Ca²⁺ activation of the TCA cycle.

To complement these cell-based studies, we analysed mitochondrial calcium uptake in mouse liver mitochondria upon in vivo silencing of MCU. A key advantage of this experimental system is that Ca²⁺ uptake phenotypes are directly attributable to mitochondria, and additional bioenergetic parameters, notably respiratory flux and ψm, can be carefully measured under classic respiratory state transitions. As respiratory state transitions are dependent on TCA cycle metabolism, electron transport, H⁺ pumping, ATP/ADP exchange, and transport of phosphate, such studies allow us to evaluate the specificity of MCU's role in mitochondrial Ca²⁺ transport. Using previously described siRNA design and delivery technology, we screened 46 distinct siRNA duplexes. We selected a duplex characterized by a half-maximal inhibitory concentration of 69 pM that achieved > 90% knockdown at a concentration of 5 nM in cultured mouse liver cells. We performed a large-scale synthesis of this siRNA duplex and encapsulated it into a lipid-based formulation optimized for liver-specific delivery. As a negative control we used a siRNA duplex specific for the firefly luciferase gene (si-LUC). We performed weekly tail vein injections of the siRNA duplexes over a 3 week period and achieved 84 ± 2% (n = 3) in vivo mRNA knockdown of MCU in the liver, which was corroborated by immunoblot analysis. Both groups of mice showed normal weight gain (5.6 ± 1.3% of body weight for si-LUC and 5.0 ± 3.0% of body weight for si-MCU, n = 3) and the gross appearance of the livers did not differ. Mitochondria isolated from these livers were physiologically intact, capable of undergoing robust respiratory state transitions. The respiratory control ratio (RCR) was comparable in si-LUC (7.7 ± 0.9, n = 3) and si-MCU animals (8.0 ± 2.4, n = 3). The ADP:O ratios were 2.77 ± 0.3 (n = 3) and 2.61 ± 0.3 (n = 3) in si-LUC and si-MCU mitochondria, respectively, indicating intact respiratory chain physiology. However, mitochondria from si-MCU mice show a profound and near complete loss in Ca²⁺ uptake in response to extramitochondrial pulses of Ca²⁺.

Collectively, our physiology studies, comprising three different experimental systems (intact cells, permeabilized cells and mitochondria purified from mouse organs), three different cell types (HeLa, HEK-293 and mouse liver), and two different silencing modalities (in vitro lentiviral shRNA and in vivo siRNA), firmly establish that MCU is essential for high capacity Ca²⁺ transport into mitochondria, and that the phenotype is not a secondary consequence of alterations in cytosolic Ca²⁺ signalling or of impaired ion or metabolite transport across the mitochondrial inner membrane. To our knowledge, this is the first time that mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake has been silenced in vivo in an animal.

We next established MCU's precise sub-organellar localization and topology. MCU was first identified as a mitochondrial protein in our previous proteomic survey, where it was detected as a low abundance protein in 12 out of 14 mouse tissues, being missed only in heart and kidney. Confirmatory immunoblot analysis suggests it is also present in the heart and the kidney, indicating it is universally expressed. As expected, a carboxy terminus GFP-tagged version of MCU localizes exclusively to mitochondria in HeLa cells as well as in HEK-293 cells. To biochemically validate MCU's localization, we fractionated HeLa cell lysate and observed significant enrichment of the approximately 35 kDa native MCU in the mitochondrial fraction. The observed molecular weight of MCU is lower than the predicted 40 kDa and is consistent with a predicted cleavable amino-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence. Multiple algorithms predict that MCU contains two transmembrane domains. To experimentally confirm mitochondrial inner membrane integration and to discriminate between transmembrane and peripheral membrane configurations, we performed alkaline carbonate extraction of proteins from intact mitochondria isolated from HEK-293 cells expressing MCU-V5. We find that MCU remains in the insoluble fraction, proving that it is a bona fide transmembrane protein. To establish the topology of MCU across the inner membrane, we disrupted the mitochondrial outer membrane by hypotonic swelling and treated the resulting mitoplasts with proteinase K. Proteins such as OXA1 that are exposed to the mitochondrial intermembrane space are digested by proteinase K, whereas COII (an integral inner membrane protein, also known as MT-CO2) and MCU are completely protected, despite being substrates for proteinase K. Our data therefore indicate that MCU is localized to the inner membrane with both its N- and C-termini facing the matrix space.

If MCU is an integral component of the uniporter, we might expect that it oligomerizes and operates within a larger complex. To test for MCU oligomerization, we performed pull-down experiments and found that V5-tagged MCU is capable of immunoprecipitating GFP-tagged MCU, indicating that MCU can form multimers. To control for nonspecific interactions we used two inner mitochondrial membrane spanning transporters as controls, neither of which immunoprecipitated with MCU-V5. We performed blue native gel separation of digitonin-solubilized mitochondria purified from HeLa cells and found that MCU migrates at an apparent molecular weight of ~450 kDa. This larger complex disappears following silencing with sh-MCU. We obtained similar results using mitochondria from livers of si-LUC and si-MCU mice. Collectively, these studies indicate that MCU oligomerizes in the mitochondrial inner membrane as part of a larger molecular weight complex.

Our topology analysis combined with computational predictions of membrane spanning domains indicate that MCU's two transmembrane helices, TM1 and TM2, are linked by a short stretch of amino acids that face the intermembrane space and contain what we now term a 'DIME' motif. We sought to determine whether conserved amino acids near and within the DIME motif are required for MCU-mediated Ca²⁺ uptake. We created a series of four alanine mutants at conserved residues (E257A, S259A, D261A, E264A) and expressed them on an sh-MCU background to evaluate their ability to rescue Ca²⁺ transport. One mutant, S259A, was capable of providing significant rescue of the sh-MCU phenotype. The remaining three mutants (E257A, D261A, E264A), however, failed to restore mitochondrial calcium uptake despite comparable expression to the S259A mutant, signifying that these highly conserved acidic residues are critical for Ca²⁺ transport.

Ruthenium red and a related compound, Ru360, are the most potent inhibitors of the mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uniporter, yet their target remains unknown. These cell-impermeant inhibitors have been useful pharmacological tools in studies of isolated mitochondria and are believed to act on the outer face of the inner membrane. We next sought to determine whether the functional S259A mutant might influence Ru360 sensitivity. Ru360 strongly abolishes mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake in permeabilized HEK-293 cells. Transient overexpression of MCU leads to a mild resistance to Ru360 compared to control. However, transient expression of the S259A mutant confers marked resistance to Ru360 in both HEK-293 and HeLa cells. These experiments clearly indicate a functional role for the linker region in both activity and Ru360 sensitivity of MCU.

# Discussion
Our genomic, physiological, biochemical and pharmacological data firmly establish that MCU is an oligomeric, mitochondrial inner membrane protein that is essential for calcium uniporter activity. In our current studies, overexpression of MCU alone did not give rise to a marked gain of Ca²⁺ uptake in HeLa cells, indicating that additional components or chaperones may be limiting in vivo. Although its precise mechanism remains to be elucidated, MCU fulfils multiple criteria for being an integral component of the uniporter, where it could serve as the pore-forming subunit or as a closely associated partner protein. First, loss of MCU leads to a profound defect in mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake in three distinct systems: intact cells, permeabilized cells and mouse liver. Second, it has two bona fide transmembrane domains and oligomerizes to form a larger molecular weight complex in the mitochondrial inner membrane. Third, mutations at evolutionarily conserved acidic residues attenuate its activity. Fourth, a point mutation in MCU confers resistance against Ru360, the most potent inhibitor of the uniporter. The current study further supports our previously reported phylogenomic signature of the mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uniporter, and together these studies identify MICU1 and MCU as an evolutionarily conserved duo that are critical for mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake. Whereas MICU1 may serve as a regulator, MCU is likely to represent a core component of the uniporter. Future studies will be necessary to establish the exact mechanism by which these proteins function together to orchestrate the mitochondrial Ca²⁺ cycle.

# Methods
Phylogenetic profiling and co-expression analyses. We performed genome-wide phylogenetic profiling using a previously reported phylogenetic matrix across 500 sequenced genomes using the Hamming distance as our similarity metric. For genome-wide mRNA co-expression analysis, we used a publicly available genome-wide tissue gene expression atlas (NCBI GSE10246). We used the published gene expression intensities normalized to the median for each chip, and then computed the Pearson correlation to MICU1 expression. For protein coexpression analysis, we used our MitoCarta protein atlas of mitochondrial protein expression across 14 tissues. We summarized the abundance of a protein as the number of detected peptides per protein per tissue, and computed the Pearson correlation to MICU1 expression.

Cell culture. HEK-293 cells, Hepa-1c1c7 and HeLa cells were received from the ATCC. HeLa cells expressing a mitochondrial matrix targeted aequorin (mt-Aeq) were purchased from Aequotech (AT-002-H). All cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM) high glucose medium (Invitrogen) with 10% FBS (Sigma) at 37°C and 5% CO2. mt-Aeq cells were maintained in 100 µg/ml geneticin (Gibco).

Plasmids and reagents. Lentiviral vectors for expressing shRNA (pLKO.1) or V5-tagged cDNAs (pLEX983) were obtained from the Broad Institute's RNAi Consortium (TRC). To silence MCU, we used the following hairpins from the TRC: sh1 (TRCN0000137529, 5' -CCAGCAACTATACACCACACT-3' ), sh2 (TRCN0000133861, 5' -GCAAGGAGTTTCTTTCTCTTT-3' ), sh3 (TRCN0000133984, 5' -CAATCAACTCAAGGATGCAAT-3' ), sh4 (TRCN0000135430, 5' -GCCATG GCAATGTATGCATAT-3' ), sh5 (TRCN0000138929, 5' -GATCGCTTCCTGG CAGAATTT-3' ). For transfections, cDNAs were inserted into pcDNA vectors with C-terminal V5/His6 or GFP tags (Invitrogen pDEST40 and pDEST47, respectively) using Gateway LR (Invitrogen). A full-length MCU human cDNA (NM_138357.1) without a stop codon was cloned into the pDONR223 Gateway vector and subsequently cloned into pLEX983, pDEST40 and pDEST47 vectors. MCU mutants E257A, S259A, D261A and E264A mutations were created using Stratagene QuikChange mutagenesis. We used TaqMan assays (ABI) to quantify the MCU transcript (CCDC109A).

Lentivirus production and infection. Procedures and reagents for virus production and infection were adapted from the Broad RNAi Consortium protocols and were described previously. Selection was begun 24 h post-infection with 2 µg/ml puromycin or 5 µg/ml blasticidin.

Rescue of sh-MCU and overexpression of MCU mutants. HeLa cells stably overexpressing shRNAs targeting either LACZ or the 3' UTR of MCU (TRCN0000133861) were transduced with either pLEX983-MCU wild-type or mutant versions and selected with 5 µg/ml blasticidin for at least 1 week before assaying. Wild-type HEK-293 or HEK-293 cells stably overexpressing sh-MCU (TRCN0000133861) were transfected with wild-type or mutant MCU cDNAs using Fugene6 reagent from Roche. To ensure high transfection efficiency HEK-293 were transfected twice 3 days apart and Ca²⁺ uptake was assayed 7 days after the first transfection.

Synthesis and in vitro screening of siRNAs targeting MCU. siRNAs with the lowest predicted off-target potentials (46) and 100% homology with mouse sequence NM_001033259.3 were selected for synthesis and screening. Single-strand RNAs were produced at Alnylam Pharmaceuticals as previously described. MCU siRNA duplex with lowest EC50 and lowest predicted off-target potential was selected. The siRNA sense strand is 5' -GAcuGAGAGA cccAuuAcAdTsdT-3' , antisense is 5' -UGuAAUGGGUCUCUcAGUCdTsdT-3' ; control luciferase siRNA sense is 5' -cuuAcGcuGAGuAcuucGAdTsdT-3' , and antisense is 5' -UCGAAGuACUcAGCGuAAGdTsdT-3' . Chemical modifications were introduced to stabilize siRNA in vivo, reduce off-target potential of sense strand and minimize immune response (2'-OMe modified nucleotides are in lower case, and phosphorothioate linkages are indicated by 's'). Hepa-1c1c7 cells (seeded 15,000 cells per well in 96-well plates) were transfected with siRNA using the Lipofectamine RNAiMAX reagent according to the manufacturer's protocols. MCU mRNA levels were quantified in cell lysates 18-24 h post-transfection using a branched-DNA assay (QuantiGene Reagent System, Panomics), according to the manufacturer's protocols. MCU mRNA levels were normalized to GAPDH mRNA.

In vivo silencing of MCU. All procedures used in animal studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. C57BL/6 mice (Charles River laboratories) received either PBS or siRNA in lipid-based formulations via tail vein injection weekly. After overnight fasting the animals were euthanized by CO2 inhalation and liver tissues were collected into ice-cold PBS for mitochondria isolation. A piece of liver tissue was snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen for measurements of mRNA and protein levels.

Luminescence-based measurement of mitochondrial Ca²⁺. Assays were performed using either mt-Aeq HeLa cells that stably express mitochondrial aequorin or wild-type HeLa cells that were transduced with an equal titre of lentivirus to express mitochondrial-targeted aequorin 3 days before assaying. 12-18 h before assaying, 50,000 cells were seeded per well in a 96-well plate. Light emission after histamine stimulation was measured as reported previously. After histamine stimulation, cells were treated with 1% Triton X-100 and 10 mM CaCl2 (final concentrations) and the light emission was recorded. To normalize, the maximal luminescence signal after histamine stimulation was divided by the total luminescence recorded per well in the entire experiment.

Measurements of cytosolic Ca²⁺. Calibrated measurements of cytosolic Ca²⁺ were made via single-cell imaging of cells loaded with 500 nM Fura-2, calibrated as previously described. Population measurement of cytosolic Ca²⁺ in response to 100 µM histamine was performed essentially as described in the Alliance for Cell Signalling protocols (PP00000210) except for using 4 µM Fluo-4 AM-ester and 200,000 cells per well in suspension. Minimum calibration was achieved with 5 µM ionomycin and 5 mM EGTA. Maximum calibration was achieved with 1% Triton X-100 and 20 mM CaCl2 final concentrations. The Kd of Fluo-4 was assumed to be 350 nM.

Assays of ψm, oxygen consumption and NAD(P)H in intact and permeabilized cells. For measurements of membrane potential, HeLa cells (50,000 per treatment) were seeded in eight wells of a 96-well plate and incubated with 3.5 µM JC-1 for 20 min. The uncoupler CCCP (5 µM) was added as a positive control. The wells were washed at least four times with phenol-red-free DMEM before measuring. For assaying, red fluorescence (excitation 531 nm, emission 590 nm) was measured followed by green fluorescence (excitation 488 nm, emission 535 nm) in a Perkin-Elmer Envision fluorescence plate reader. Background fluorescence values recorded from wells without cells were subtracted from all fluorescence values before calculating red/green fluorescence ratios. Intact cell respiration was measured using Seahorse XF-24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer, as previously described. To investigate Ca²⁺ stimulation of mitochondrial NAD(P)H in permeabilized HEK-293 cells, we adapted a previously described protocol.

Measurement of mitochondrial Ca²⁺ uptake in permeabilized cells. Extra-mitochondrial free Ca²⁺ was monitored in digitonin-permeabilized cells as previously described. Calcium Green-5N fluorescence (excitation 506 nm, emission 531 nm) was monitored every 0.2 s at room temperature using a Perkin-Elmer Envision plate reader after injection of CaCl2 (~50 µM final concentration). For Ru360 treatments, selected concentrations of Ru360 or H2O (vehicle) were added to the digitonized cells and incubated 2 min before CaCl2 injection. For calculation of relative Ca²⁺ uptake, linear fits were computed for the times indicated.

Mitochondrial isolation, mitoplast preparation, and topology analysis. Cell lysates, crude mitochondria and mitoplasts were prepared from cultured HEK-293 cells as previously described. Immunoblotting of the four fractions (5 µg) was performed with commercially available antibodies: anti-MCU, anti-HSP60, anti-CYCS, anti-OXA1, anti-COII and anti-V5. Alkaline carbonate extraction from crude mitochondria and proteinase K digestion of mitoplasts were performed as described previously.

Measurement of respiration, ψm and Ca²⁺ uptake in isolated mouse mitochondria. Mitochondria were isolated from freshly collected mouse livers as previously described and resuspended into a buffer containing 220 mM mannitol, 75 mM sucrose, 10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% BSA and stored on ice until further use. Respiration and ψm were measured optically in a well-stirred cuvette as previously described. For Ca²⁺ uptake measurements, 400 µg of isolated mitochondria were resuspended in 500 µl of potassium chloride (KCl) media (125 mM KCl, 2 mM K2HPO4, 1 mM MgCl2, 20 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.4) containing 1 µM Calcium Green-5N and 5 mM glutamate and 5 mM malate. Fluorescence was monitored at room temperature using a Perkin-Elmer LS-50B fluorescence spectrometer equipped with a stirring device. Respiratory control ratios (RCRs) were computed as the ratio of the ADP-stimulated respiration to the respiratory substrates-based respiration. The ADP:O ratio was computed after correcting for the oxygen leak into the cuvette. Values represent the mean ± s.d. of three independent biological replicate mouse injections performed on three different days.

Confocal microscopy. HeLa cells cultured in Lab-Tek II chambered slides were co-transfected with plasmids expressing MCU-GFP and Mito-HcRed. Twenty-four hours post-transfection, cells were washed three times with PBS and imaged using a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope.

Blue native studies. Membrane protein complexes were separated by electrophoresis as previously described. Briefly, mitochondria were isolated from ~20 million HeLa cells stably expressing sh-LACZ or sh-MCU according to the MitoSciences protocol. Total protein was quantified by bicinchoninic assay and 5 µg of mitochondria were solubilized in 1% digitonin (w/v) on ice. Electrophoresis was performed using the NativePAGE Novex BisTris Gel System from Invitrogen. Protein was transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane and immunoblotted with a commercially available antibody to MCU. Membranes were stripped and reprobed with anti-ATP5A1 as a loading control.

Immunoprecipitation studies. One confluent 10-cm dish of HEK-293 cells stably overexpressing either MICU1-V5 or MCU-V5 was washed twice with ice-cold PBS approximately 36 h post-transfection with either MCU-GFP or MICU1-GFP. Cells were lysed for 30 min with 1 ml of lysis buffer containing 1% n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM), 150 mM NaCl, and 50 mM Tris pH 7.4, and the insoluble fraction was removed by centrifugation. The soluble fraction was incubated with Dynabeads Protein G coated with anti-V5 antibody. Immunoprecipitations were performed according to the manufacturer's guidelines. Eluents were immunoblotted with anti-V5 antibody to confirm binding and with anti-GFP antibody to probe for interactions. For anti-Flag immunoprecipitation studies, 2 million HEK-293 cells were plated in 10-cm plates. Cells were transfected with 2 µg of indicated plasmids using Fugene6 1 day later. After 2 days, cells were solubilized in 1 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES KOH, pH 7.4, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100), centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 g and cleared lysates were incubated with anti-Flag M2 affinity gel for 2 h at 4°C. The immunoprecipitates were washed once with 1 ml of lysis buffer and three times with lysis buffer including 200 mM NaCl. After the last wash, the immunoprecipitates were boiled in 40 µl of SDS sample buffer. The immunoprecipitates (15 µl) were used for immunodetection using anti-Flag and anti-MICU1.
