# Abstract

Understanding the sequence determinants that give rise to diversity among individuals and species is the central challenge of genetics. Despite ever-greater numbers of sequenced genomes, most genome-wide association studies cannot distinguish causal variants from linked passenger mutations spanning many genes. We report that this inherent challenge can be overcome in model organisms. By pushing the advantages of inbred crossing to its practical limit in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we improved the statistical resolution of linkage analysis to single nucleotides. This 'super-resolution' approach allowed us to map 370 causal variants across 26 quantitative traits. Missense, synonymous, and cis-regulatory mutations collectively gave rise to phenotypic diversity, providing mechanistic insight into the basis of evolutionary divergence. Our data also systematically unmasked complex genetic architectures, revealing that multiple closely linked driver mutations frequently act on the same quantitative trait. Single-nucleotide mapping thus complements traditional deletion and overexpression screening paradigms and opens new frontiers in quantitative genetics.

# Introduction

Genetics is not destiny. However, the DNA polymorphisms that are inherited in families can affect our risk for disease, the physical dimensions of our bodies, and even our baseline behavioral tendencies. Long before physical genomes could be fully sequenced, the early pioneers of quantitative genetics scoured the genome for mutations responsible for the most extreme manifestations of these traits. By harnessing the power of family pedigrees, investigators linked unique restriction endonuclease sites to disease alleles, creating the first linkage maps of our genomes.

Although linkage was a blessing that allowed geneticists to pinpoint genes responsible Mendelian diseases, it is now a curse for the vast majority of heritable traits, which are influenced by many variants of small effect. Identifying these variants is hampered by the sparsity of meiotic crossovers. Even in a highly outbred human population, the average size of a haplotype block spans dozens of polymorphisms, meaning that each causal polymorphism is inherited along with numerous statistically indistinguishable passenger mutations. Thus, despite rapid advances in identifying polymorphisms, modern genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are often unable to distinguish true causal mutations from nearby neutral variants. Current methods for fine mapping rely on functional profiling of candidate variants within each quantitative trait locus (QTL). However, in virtually all cases, attribution of causality is based on some prior knowledge from directed studies, preventing discovery of fundamentally new variants.

# Main

## Mapping causal variants in theory

The statistical resolution of mapping genotype to phenotype is fundamentally limited by genetic linkage between adjacent variants. Closely related individuals share long haplotype blocks, where polymorphisms in the same gene or region are perfectly correlated. Such linkage can be broken by meiotic recombination. In highly outbred populations, recombination over thousands of generations fragments ancestral haplotypes into smaller and smaller pieces. However, outbreeding comes with the cost of introducing new haplotypes and de novo mutations that systematically confound genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Thus, studies in model organisms commonly employ inbreeding so that every allele can be traced to either a maternal or paternal haplotype. Within this restricted genotype space, DNA sequence can fully explain the heritability of most phenotypes. However, the quantitative trait loci (QTL) discovered in these crosses span dozens of highly linked variants and thus often cannot even identify a specific causal gene.

The phenotypic effect of adjacent variants can be distinguished in theory if a sufficient number of individuals contain meiotic breakpoints between the variants. The number of breakpoints between two loci scales with recombination rate (ρ) and the number of individuals genotyped (N). These design parameters are thus governed by choice of model organism and practical ability to sequence and maintain large cohorts of individuals. Across eukarya, we observed differences in recombination rate that spanned several orders of magnitude.

Low genetic mapping resolution is especially pronounced for inbred crosses of laboratory organisms. Although such studies can capture a far greater degree of heritability than most GWAS, practical constraints dictate that their embedded crossing schemes involve a limited number of meioses. Inbred crosses in yeast with over 1,000 fully genotyped segregants can thus explain >90% of a trait's heritability, but are only able to map QTLs with a resolution that spans dozens of genes in the compact yeast genome (10-100 kb). Identifying the causal variant within a QTL requires manually engineering dozens of candidate polymorphisms or performing laborious backcrosses. This last-mile problem in identifying causal variants has severely restrained the practical utility of inbred crossing strategies in systematically informing our understanding of how natural genetic variation drives phenotypic change.

Here we develop a theoretical framework for identifying causal variants with true statistical rigor and without the need for any additional experimentation. We put our theory into practice by mapping hundreds of causal variants in a highly inbred yeast cross. This carefully designed experiment liberated each site of genetic variation from its original genetic background, allowing us to decouple the phenotypic effects of variants separated by as few as 100 base pairs. Our data provide new insights into the richness of natural genetic variation and charts a roadmap for achieving a central objective of quantitative genetics: systematic understanding of the relationship between genotype and phenotype at single nucleotide resolution.

Larger genome sizes correlated strongly with reduced recombination rates (with a power law exponent of -3/4). Thus, larger genomes incur two simultaneous costs: greater expenditure in sequencing and inferior resolution in mapping causal variants. We noticed that the yeast S. cerevisiae was a particularly favorable outlier with a 12 megabase (Mb) genome and an average of 3.4 recombinations per Mb (340cM/ Mb). Most other commonly studied model organisms had below average recombination rates (~3 crossovers per generation or 1.6 cM/Mb in flies, ~14 per generation or 0.4 cM/Mb in mice). To compensate for infrequent recombination, inbred lines in mice and flies have employed successive generations of inbreeding to boost crossover density. However, even after >50 generations of inbreeding, these crosses have been unable to map causal variants at even single gene level resolution, let alone to single nucleotides. Even with the unique advantages inherent to yeast, systematic mapping of causal variants has not been possible with existing designs.

We turned to computational modeling to define the practical requirements of an inbred yeast cross that would enable single nucleotide resolution mapping. We varied three key parameters in our model: 1) number of generations of inbreeding (G), 2) number of individuals genotyped (N), and 3) the mean physical distance between adjacent polymorphisms (µ). These simulations revealed a set of feasible designs that had not been previously explored. A key new feature of these designs was their restricted degree of polymorphism- on the order of 1 per 1000 base pairs. Crosses with larger degrees of polymorphism required a proportional increase in the number of individuals genotyped. As a rule, the sensitivity of identifying causal variants scaled with the number of total crossovers versus the density of polymorphisms. However, precision delineated an all or nothing boundary in parameter space. Not all traits we simulated mapped equally well. Highly heritable traits were more accurately mapped than weakly heritable traits, and the relationship between heritability and accuracy was non-linear. This highlights a built-in advantage of investigating phenotypes with minimal environmental contributions. Considering the constraints of time and money on G and N, we selected a yeast cross design with 1 polymorphism per 1000 base pairs. Because this is on par with the genetic divergence between individuals within a species, a cross with this design would have the potential to comprehensively illuminate how precise genetic differences between individuals manifest as heritable traits.

## A highly inbred yeast cross

The degree of polymorphism present in a genetic cross determines both the complexity of a quantitative trait and the resolution at which causal variants can be mapped. Geneticists often employ large divergence between parents (heterozygosity = 1/µ ~ 0.01) because it ensures phenotypic diversity in progeny. Yet in practice this also ensures that causal variants cannot be distinguished from adjacent passenger mutations. We re-examined this prevailing orthodoxy by constructing an inbred cross in S. cerevisiae with a ~10-fold reduction in the number of segregating variants compared to prior studies. We chose parents with uniform genetic variance across the genome (heterozygosity ~0.001), derived from very different ecological and geographical niches: a vineyard in California (RM-11a) and a patient in Italy (YJM975 α). As a frame of reference, the degree of polymorphism, or number of genetic differences between the crossed strains, was comparable to the genetic distance between two individual humans and represents, on average, multiple mutations per gene.

A potential concern about reducing the genetic variance between parents is that it might unduly restrict diversification of biological traits in progeny. The phenotypic profiles of the two parents were indeed relatively well correlated (r~0.6) despite having been isolated from different ecotypes. However, their meiotic progeny exhibited a high degree of variation across diverse traits. Remarkably, they were as phenotypically diverse as the most distantly related strains on the S. cerevisiae phylogenetic tree, underscoring the power of meiotic recombination to produce new traits by placing genetic variants in new genomic environments.

Our model predicted that six generations of inbreeding would produce a sufficient number meiotic crossovers to statistically resolve individual variants from adjacent variants. To prevent inadvertent fixation of one parental allele at some loci, we maintained a large pooled population at every step of inbreeding and clonal propagation. After six generations, we isolated 1,125 F6 haploid progeny and performed whole genome sequencing on clonal expansions of each individual. In total, these F6 offspring contained over ten times more meiotic crossovers than sites of variation (SNPs), a ratio that our model predicted would be ideal for detecting genome-wide association at single nucleotide resolution.

## Mapping causal variants in practice

We first used our cross to map resistance to azoles, the most commonly used class of antifungal drugs. We measured the growth all 1,125 F6 offspring upon exposure to seven azoles from three major classes: first generation imidazole-based drugs, second and third generation triazoles in widespread clinical use, and agricultural azoles. Although these drugs harbor distinct functional groups around their central heterocyclic rings, they share a common drug target: Erg11, the rate-limiting enzyme in ergosterol biosynthesis. Consequently, we observed a relatively correlated response to all classes of azole-based drugs in the meiotic progeny (mean r2 = 0.41). To identify the genetic determinants of pan-azole resistance, we performed QTL mapping. This standard analysis established a locus of strong effect on the right arm of Chromosome 4. In previous yeast crosses, the statistical boundaries of such a QTL (1.5 ∆LOD) would typically span 10-100kb, hundreds of candidate mutations, and dozens of genes in the highly compact yeast genome. However, due to the increase in meiotic crossovers inherent to our inbreeding scheme, the same statistical cutoffs allowed us to identify a single causal gene: UPC2. UPC2 is a positive regulator of ergosterol biosynthesis that is activated in response to sterol depletion, providing a logical link between this gene and pleiotropic azole resistance.

Next, we attempted to increase our resolution from a single causal gene to a specific causal polymorphism. UPC2 harbored 5 candidate mutations. In addition to one promoter variant, the UPC2 ORF contained two synonymous and two nonsynonymous variants. Currently, investigators employ computational approaches that integrate prevailing experimental intuition and conservation metrics to estimate the likelihood that individual polymorphisms are responsible for diseases or other traits. These algorithms (e.g. SIFT and PolyPhen-2) would miss UPC2, as both missense mutations were predicted to be 'tolerated' and the other classes of mutations (e.g. synonymous variants) are uniformly ignored. To test these assumptions experimentally, we performed 'gold-standard' allele replacement experiments where we swapped each candidate SNP at its endogenous locus via homologous recombination. Unexpectedly, one of the synonymous mutations in UPC2 (2694C->T) was responsible for the pan-azole resistance.

However, this brute-force approach is not amenable to systematic discovery of causal variants, and it is especially ill-suited for the large confidence intervals inherent to most QTLs. It often fails entirely when dissecting the loci of minor effect that give rise to genetically complex traits. Fortunately, the density of meiotic recombination in our cross allowed us to discriminate among candidate variants with genetics alone. We noticed that multiple meiotic crossovers within the UPC2 locus created natural allele replacements. Although most segregants contained only clinical or wine variants at all UPC2 positions, thirty-eight harbored crossovers between the two parental haplotypes at this locus. When these meiotic crossovers swapped passenger mutations in UPC2, no phenotypic change was observed. In contrast, swapping the single true causal variant (2694C->T) was equivalent to swapping all five mutations in the haplotype block. We used these natural allele replacements to formalize a new fine mapping statistic (QTN score) that enhanced the statistical resolution of most QTLs to single nucleotide resolution.

We extended this fine mapping analysis to all loci associated with azole-resistance. The locus of strongest effect typically accounted for roughly a quarter of the variance of a trait. Yet dozens more variants were generally required to fully explain heritability. Although mapping was less reliable for such variants of small effect, many were still resolved to single nucleotides and most to single genes. We discovered a coherent network of 35 causal variants that contributed to resistance across multiple classes of azoles. The network included polymorphisms in some known antifungal resistance genes (ERG11, PDR16, OLE1) and as a whole was strongly enriched in genetic and physical interactions (P < 10^-4). We observed virtually no overlap with the causal variants of an orthogonal antifungal drug (amphotericin B), establishing the specific relationship between these individual polymorphisms and azole resistance. Across all of the complex traits that we studied, pleiotropic alleles tended to reside in genes already annotated as such by other functional genomic methods including PDR1, the major transcription factor that regulates pleiotropic drug response elements.

## Complex genetic architecture within a QTL

Our ability to distinguish the effects of adjacent SNPs prompted us to investigate whether multiple mutations within a single gene might influence the same quantitative trait. We found one such locus at SKY1, an SR kinase that contained two mutations associated with sensitivity to the chemotherapeutic drug 5-fluorouracil (5-FU). SKY1 deletion causes 5-FU hypersensitivity, and in colorectal cancer patients low expression of its human homolog (SRPK1) correlates with prolonged survival after 5-FU chemotherapy. To gain structural insight into the molecular basis of this phenotypic change, we mapped the two Sky1 polymorphisms onto its crystal structure. One allele (T666A), which was recently derived in the clinical isolate, would likely alter the position of a key residue for substrate recognition (K668). The other allele (D738N) modifies the charge balance of the highly basic C-terminal fragment of Sky1 (DHKRH).

To examine the phenotypic consequences of these perturbations, we measured the fitness all four allelic combinations of SKY1 in 5-FU. Remarkably, both the parental clinical and wine haplotypes exhibited nearly neutral fitness. Thus, the entire SKY1 locus would have been overlooked in a traditional genome-wide association test, despite its well-established connection to 5-FU. However, even though the two variants were separated by only 216 nucleotides, we observed 21 hybrid alleles with one variant from each parent. These hybrid alleles revealed that T666A is detrimental for growth in 5-FU, whereas D738N is beneficial. The resolution afforded by our cross thus enabled us to explore a complex genetic interaction between two tightly linked variants that would be missed by other crossing strategies.

Multiple causal variants within the same gene were common across diverse complex traits. For growth in the oxidative stressor cupric sulfate (CuSO4), we mapped two such variants to IXR1, a repressor of hypoxia genes during normoxia. Using phylogenetic analysis, we found that the beneficial mutation (Q299K) arose uniquely in the wine strain and was not shared by any other S. cerevisiae strains. In contrast, the deleterious mutation (T45A) arose independently in both the clinical strain and a genetically distant baking strain, perhaps reflecting a tradeoff between tolerance to oxidative stress and growth in anaerobic conditions. These examples establish that a critical pragmatic assumption in quantitative genetics - that a single causal mutation underlies each quantitative trait locus - may vastly oversimplify the complexity of naturally evolving genomes.

## Pervasive functional coupling of linked mutations

The genomes of yeast and most eukaryotes, in contrast to most prokaryotes, are not organized in operons. Consequently, QTLs are generally assumed to harbor one driver and multiple neutral passenger mutations. Yet across the 26 quantitative traits we measured, 52 pairs of mutations that influenced the same trait fell within 10 centimorgans (cM) of each other (90% linkage; ~35kb). These functionally coupled driver mutations often occurred in different genes (41/52) and vastly exceeded the number that would expected by random chance if causal variants for complex traits were located randomly in the genome (P < 10^-5, Poisson distribution, P < 10^-16 with more lenient cutoffs).

We observed examples of beneficial mutations working together to exert greater selective effect, and examples of deleterious mutations coupling to beneficial mutations to dampen extreme phenotypes, or perhaps even escape selection. These linked variants were commonly derived from the same parental haplotype (23/52), suggesting that the effect was not simply due to the formation of novel recombinant genotypes. Such close linkage of variants producing a complex trait would ensure that a phenotype could persist across generations despite the recombination inherent to sexual reproduction. Although exploring the broader implications of these data stands as a goalpost for future studies, our data underscore that throughout the evolution of species it is haplotype blocks, rather than individual genes and mutations, that serve as the fundamental unit of inheritance.

## Functional genomics using nature's genetic toolkit

Our collection of causal SNPs allowed us to explore whether the mutations that underlie quantitative traits exhibited unique properties compared to all variants that segregated in the cross. Across the numerous conditions we tested, we mapped a total of 370 causal variants. A handful of the traits in our study were monogenic, but most were complex, arising from on average 14 single nucleotide variants. This was not an intentional design choice, but instead reflects the prevalence of complexity for most heritable traits that have been studied.

As might be expected, we observed a strong enrichment for missense mutations among causal SNPs, especially among alleles of large effect. In contrast, mutations directly adjacent to the causal SNPs exhibited no deviation from random expectation. However, missense variants represented less than half of all causal variants. Mutations in regulatory regions and synonymous mutations each comprised roughly a quarter of causal variants. Indeed, the complex traits we observed were fuelled by polymorphisms of all molecular classes. The relative contributions of coding and regulatory variants to evolutionary change have been vigorously debated. Our data illustrate, across many traits and on a genome-wide scale, that even in a highly compact genome both types of variation can exert a strong influence on phenotype.

Strikingly, the average effect sizes of synonymous and missense mutations were similar. The effects of non-coding mutations were generally weaker, but still very significant. The effects of non-coding variants are potentially simpler to verify than missense mutations because non-coding variants are likely to alter the transcript level or protein level of a gene. We first validated a proximal promoter variant for the small plasma membrane proteolipid PMP3. Artificial overexpression of this gene promotes resistance to the antifungal drug amphotericin B.

In our cross, the wine allele at the PMP3 promoter was strongly associated with amphotericin B resistance. To test whether this arose from increased PMP3 expression, we used qRT-PCR to measure its RNA levels. In rich nutrient conditions (YPD), PMP3 expression levels were similar for both promoter variants. However, upon Amphotericin B treatment, PMP3 transcripts were upregulated by ~2-fold in segregants with the wine allele but remained unchanged in segregants with the clinical allele. The proximal promoter mutation occurs in a potential binding site for Pdr3, a transcription factor that upregulates membrane transporters in response to a wide range of drugs. Our observations thus provide a logical explanation for how this promoter mutation could lead to amphotericin B resistance.

We next examined whether newly arising (derived) mutations in the wine or clinical parents would provide a fitness benefit or detriment compared to ancestral alleles. In contrast to random mutagenesis, where the vast majority of new alleles are deleterious, the derived mutations in each parent were frequently beneficial. The functional genetic variation present in our cross thus comprises a natural toolkit of diverse genetic perturbations beyond simple loss-of-function alleles.

Although traditional genetic approaches have annotated a large fraction of the genome, hundreds of genes still have unknown function, even in an organism as well studied as S. cerevisiae. We uncovered polymorphisms in dozens of genes that have not previously been linked to the quantitative traits we examined via homozygous or heterozygous deletion screens. Yet genes that spanned both approaches acted as hubs for an integrated network of genes specific to each methodology. Our approach thus provides a strategy for using natural genetic variation to establish a more complete genetic architecture for biological traits.

# Discussion

More than fifty years ago the power of recombination (and the ability to select for rare events) enabled phage geneticists to discover the triplet nature of the genetic code. In the current genomic era, recombination is again poised to serve as a workhorse for genetic discovery. Our data demonstrate that a dense recombination map enables statistical differentiation of individual causal variants from a multitude of confounding, highly linked mutations. We mapped hundreds of genome-wide associations with single nucleotide resolution, allowing us to systematically explore the functional properties of natural genetic variation. We found that numerous missense, synonymous, and cis-regulatory mutations collectively gave rise to phenotypic diversity, in contrast to prevailing models that systematically discount non-coding variation or synonymous mutations within ORFs. Indeed, most traits we examined were genetically complex, and were driven by both coding and non-coding variants.

The consistent impact of synonymous mutations across a diverse panel of traits has strong implications for our fundamental understanding of how genotype determines phenotype. Most measures of positive selection in evolution assume that all synonymous mutations are neutral and can only become fixed via random chance (drift). In contrast, we found that a substantial number of naturally occurring synonymous mutations exert strong effects of growth. These synonymous mutations, in aggregate, deviated substantially from the expected random distribution for such mutations - providing evidence that they have been shaped by selection pressures in the wild. For pragmatic reasons, genome-wide association studies in humans systematically discount any influence of synonymous mutations on phenotype. Yet a handful of targeted investigations have reported that synonymous mutations can modulate phenotypic severity or penetrance. Our data thus challenge an assumption in bioinformatics and clinical diagnostics that is born out of expediency: that synonymous mutations are universally neutral. Instead, we find that synonymous mutations can commonly exert significant impacts on biological traits.

Remarkably, mutations that influenced the same trait tended to cluster in linkage groups. In sexually reproducing organisms this close physical coupling may allow genetically complex traits to persist over long evolutionary timescales. Several attempts to fine-map QTLs in mice, flies, plants, and humans have also uncovered multiple causal variants within a single locus, but such fine mapping has not been possible systematically. Our data suggest that clusters of causal mutations - which confound traditional genome-wide association studies - may be a general feature of natural genetic variation.

Genetics in inbred crosses holds several crucial advantages over efforts to sequence greater numbers of outbred individuals: i) allele frequency is ~50% in the progeny, enabling accurate assessment of alleles that are rare in the population as a whole, ii) the degree of polymorphism in a cross can be carefully controlled through selection of founder parents, and iii) recombination can be enhanced by multiple generations of mating. Our cross balanced the costs of reducing genetic variation with the practical challenges of sequencing and maintaining a large cohort of inbred progeny. Crucially, our results suggest that judicious selection of ecologically and geographically diverse parents preserves a high degree of phenotypic complexity despite reduced genetic divergence.

Extensive modeling of the parameter space of all possible inbred cross designs suggests that achieving single nucleotide mapping resolution could be possible in metazoa. In flies, precision mapping could be achieved with a ~100-fold increase in the number of total meiotic crossovers for the degree of polymorphism in current crosses. It would require a 10,000-fold increase in mice. We also simulated an inbred cross in mice with 1,000,000 F6 individuals and 1,000,000 sites of variation. Even with this extreme number of potential false positive sites, our statistical method retained >95% precision and estimated effect sizes with remarkable accuracy.

Because genotyping and phenotyping such a large cohort of individuals is presently infeasible, a more immediately practical strategy would be to restrict genetic variation between founding parents. One major hurdle to this strategy is the frequency of outcrossing events observed in wild populations, which create mosaic genetic architectures with regions of dense variation. Thus, careful selection of parents, ideally from highly bottlenecked and isolated populations, provides a feasible route.

Our model suggests a second fruitful strategy for high-resolution mapping: increasing the frequency of meiotic crossovers relative to genome size. Among metazoans, social insects such as bees and ants exhibit the highest known recombination rates (>8 times greater than D. melanogaster). Sequential inbreeding could prove challenging in these organisms, but would have far greater mapping power. Alternatively, methods that artificially enhance recombination rates - which have been deployed in a handful of studies - would also yield large dividends. Although the establishment of a dense recombination map is a prerequisite for mapping causal variants, our crossing scheme enables even deeper inspection the genetic architecture of heredity. Because all 1152 segregants in our cross are fully genotyped haploids, they can be crossed to each other in an arrayed format to generate ~250,000 unique diploids without any further sequencing. A genotype to phenotype map at this larger scale would be statistically competent to illuminate how pairwise epistasis among natural genetic variants might contribute to the 'missing heritability' problem.

As sequencing costs fall and methods for enhancing recombination rates advance, the scope of genetic variation accessible to inbred crossing strategies will increase. Naturally occurring polymorphisms are thus poised to provide a parallel genetic toolkit that captures a range of biochemical perturbations not present in traditional deletion, siRNA, and CRISPR-based screens. However, the natural variation mapped in any one cross represents only a fraction of the mutational space available to an organism. To saturate annotation of natural variants and enable truly comprehensive functional genomics, it will be necessary to perform additional crosses between new pairs of parents, as inspired by the famous Heidelberg screens. Many such pairs of wild yeast strains with unique ecological origins and constrained genotypic divergence are presently available and can be crossed with minimal genetic manipulation. The ability to systematically identify the individual polymorphisms that give rise to quantitative traits provides new possibilities for understanding the relationship between genetic variation and phenotypic diversity on a genome-wide scale.

# Methods

## Yeast strains
S. cerevisiae isolates from the Saccharomyces Genome Resequencing Project (SGRP) Strain Set 2 were used as founder strains. The genotypes were as follows: RM11 MATa ho::kanMX ura3∆0 leu2∆0 and YJM975 MAT α ho::HygMX ura3∆::KanMX-barcode(ACCGGT) his3∆::NatMX. F6 segregants were selected on YPD+ClonNat such that all individual progeny are auxotrophic for both uracil and histidine. Both mating types are equally represented among F6 segregants and should be pooled separately for bulk experiments. Lastly, leucine auxotrophy and hygromycin B resistance both segregate 50/50 among the progeny and can confound certain phenotypes such as rapamycin resistance.

## Crossing strategy
The intercross was propagated with a large population of >10^7 cells at all steps after the initial mating to minimize the effects of genetic drift. Diploids were selected in bulk by mating on YPD followed by selection on SD-His+ClonNat with monosodium glutamate as the nitrogen source. Sporulation was performed for 5 days on a room temperature roller wheel in 1% potassium acetate (KAc). Spores were chemically and mechanically enriched, bypassing the need for designer genes that enable spore selection. Diploids were killed off by resuspending a sporulating culture in 1:1 diethyl ether:H2O for 10 minutes, followed by 3 washes with H2O. Next, the pellet was treated with 1 mg/mL zymolyase (ZT100) in 1M sorbitol for 1 hour at room temperature to remove the ascus and further kill diploids. To mechanically enrich for single dissociated spores, the suspension was pelleted and resuspended in H2O and vortexed vigorously, thereby binding the hydrophobic spores to the tube wall. Spores on the tube wall were resolubilized with a 0.01% solution of the non-ionic detergent NP-40.

## Genotyping
DNA was extracted in 96 well format using the Norgen Biotek Fungi/Yeast Genomic DNA Isolation Kit. Library preparation was performed using a standard Nextera tagmentation reaction. During PCR, unique i5 and i7 barcode combinations were attached to enable pooled sequencing. The pool was sequenced via NextSeq 500 to a mean coverage > 15. Sequencing data were processed according to GATK best practices. Adapters were removed using Trimmomatic-0.33, sequences were trimmed by quality score using sickle, and aligned to the yeast genome using Bowtie2. Variants were called in batches of 96 using GATK and VCFs for all segregants and the original founders were merged.

## Phenotyping
Phenotypes were measured in quadruplicate using a Singer ROTOR in 384 well format on solid agar plates and an EPSON V700 Photo Scanner. Cells were grown at 30°C in rich media plus drug. Phenotypes were quantified as colony area size using SGAtools. 26 diverse chemical perturbations were chosen. All phenotypes were subsequently normalized to mean 0 and variance 1. Edge effects and plate-by-plate effects were removed by including edge and plate pseudo-genotypes in all multiple regressions.

## Mapping causal variants
1-dimensional LOD plots were calculated. To build a model incorporating the effects of multiple allelic variants, we performed linear regression via stepwise selection and compared to selection via a generalized linear model with an elastic-net penalty. Fine mapping was performed for each candidate variant by performing pairwise comparisons with all other variants within a 20 kb window. We defined QTN score = - log 10 (max(H1)) for each variant within a 20kb window of the QTL peak. To empirically calculate our false discovery rate (FDR), we performed extensive bootstrapping analyses.

## Modeling
We simulated genotypes under the following assumptions: random distribution of variants across the genome and uniform recombination rate between any two sets of variants. We simulated the changes in genotype over the course of a sequential intercross by choosing random sites for meiotic recombination at each generation of the intercross. To simulate phenotypes, we randomly selected 100 markers to exert an effect on the phenotype, with all other markers exerting no effect. We calculated phenotypes for each individual based on its genotype and added random Gaussian noise.

## Structural predictions for missense variants
Multiple sequence alignments were generated using NCBI BLAST+ 2.6.0 and the Uniprot database. Sequences were aligned using Clustal Omega and conservation was calculated. Secondary structure predictions were made using a local instance of JPred. Disordered residues were defined using DISOPRED3.

## Synonymous mutations and Codon Adaptation Index
Codon Adaptation Index (CAI) was used as the primary metric for codon optimality. We calculated CAI and codon abundance across 945 sequenced organisms. We simulated the effects of random mutation on CAI in each organism.

## Allele Replacements
Allele replacements were performed via delitto perfetto. Briefly, UPC2 was first knocked out in 6 unique segregants with a URA3 + KanMX cassette. The replacement UPC2 allele was then reintegrated via homologous recombination at its original genomic locus via selection on 5-FOA.

## Quantitative RT-PCR
3 biological replicates of each strain were grown to late exponential phase. RNA was extracted via acid phenol/chloroform and ethanol precipitated. DNA was digested with Ambion Turbo DNA-free kit. cDNA synthesis was carried out with Oligo-dT primers and Superscript IV Reverse Transcriptase. Quantitative PCR was performed with KAPA SYBR FAST qPCR Master Mix. PMP3 expression was quantified with two separate primer sets.

## Western blot
Wine and clinical alleles of PXA1 were Gateway cloned onto destination vector pAG416-ccdB-EGFP. Cells were grown to late exponential phase. Protein was extracted via TCA precipitation and bead beating. SDS-PAGE and Western transfer were performed. Membranes were blocked and incubated with primary antibodies against GFP and Histone H3. Chemiluminescent reactions were visualized and densitometry was performed.
