# Mutations affecting segment number and polarity in Drosophila

Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard & Eric Wieschaus

# Abstract
In systematic searches for embryonic lethal mutants of Drosophila melanogaster we have identified 15 loci which when mutated alter the segmental pattern of the larva. These loci probably represent the majority of such genes in Drosophila. The phenotypes of the mutant embryos indicate that the process of segmentation involves at least three levels of spatial organization: the entire egg as developmental unit, a repeat unit with the length of two segments, and the individual segment.

# Introduction
The construction of complex form from similar repeating units is a basic feature of spatial organisation in all higher animals. Very little is known for any organism about the genes involved in this process. In Drosophila, the metameric nature of the pattern is most obvious in the thoracic and abdominal segments of the larval epidermis and we are attempting to identify all loci required for the establishment of this pattern. The identification of these genes and the description of their phenotypes should lead to a better understanding of the general mechanisms responsible for the formation of metameric patterns.

In Drosophila, the anlagen for the individual segments arise as equally sized subdivisions of the blastoderm, each segment represented by a transverse strip of about three or four cell diameters. A cell lineage restriction between neighbouring segments is established at or soon after this stage. Two basic types of mutation have been described which change the segmental pattern of the Drosophila larva. Maternal effect mutations like bicaudal lead to a global alteration of the embryonic pattern. Bicaudal embryos develop two posterior ends arranged in mirror-image symmetry, and lack head, thorax and anterior abdomen. The bicaudal phenotype suggests that the initial spatial organisation of the egg established during oogenesis involves a morphogen gradient that defines antero-posterior coordinates in early embryonic pattern formation. The subdivision of the embryo into segments is thought to occur by a differential response of the zygotic genome to the maternal gradient. Homeotic mutations (for example, bithorax) seem to be involved in a final step of this response process. These mutations change the identity of individual segments; for example, Ultrabithorax transforms the metathoracic and first abdominal segments into mesothoracic segments. However, the homeotic loci do not affect the total number, size or polarity of the segments, nor do they point to any other step which might intervene between the maternal gradient and the final pattern of segments.

We have undertaken a systematic search for mutations that affect the segmental pattern depending on the zygotic genome. We describe here mutations at 15 loci which show one of three novel types of pattern alteration: pattern duplication in each segment (segment polarity mutants; six loci), pattern deletion in alternating segments (pair-rule mutants; six loci) and deletion of a group of adjacent segments (gap mutants; three loci).

# Main
## The segmental pattern of the normal Drosophila larva
The cuticular pattern of a normal Drosophila larva shortly after hatching is comprised of three thoracic and eight abdominal segments. Although differences are observed in different body regions, all segments have certain morphological features in common. The anterior of each segment is marked with a band of denticles, most of which point posteriorly. The posterior part of each segment is naked. The segment borders run along the anterior margins of the denticle bands, they have no special morphological features. The polarity of the pattern is indicated by the orientation of the denticles and, in the abdomen, by the shape of the bands. In the thoracic segments the bands are narrow with fine denticles whereas those in the abdominal segments are broader and comprised of thick pigmented denticles.

## Segment polarity mutants: deletions in each segment
Mutants in this class have the normal number of segments. However, in each segment a defined fraction of the normal pattern is deleted and the remainder is present as a mirror-image duplication. The duplicated part is posterior to the 'normal' part and has reversed polarity.

Six such loci have been identified. Three loci, fused, wingless and cubitus interruptus, were previously known whereas gooseberry, hedgehog and patch are new. All the mutations in this class are zygotic lethals and the phenotypes are only produced in homozygous embryos. One of the loci, fused, also shows a maternal effect in that a wild-type allele in the mother is sufficient to rescue the mutant phenotype of the homozygous embryos.

In all mutants except patch the region deleted includes the naked posterior part of the pattern and the duplication involves a substantial fraction of the anterior denticle band. In mutant larvae, the ventral side of each segment is almost entirely covered with denticles, the posterior fraction of which point anteriorly. The segment identity seems to be normal, the denticles of the abdominal segments being large and pigmented whereas those of the thorax are short and pale. The anterior margin of the region duplicated in these mutants coincides with the segment boundary in only two cases, fused and gooseberry. In wingless and hedgehog it lies posterior to the boundary, such that these larvae apparently lack all segment boundaries.

The phenotype of embryos homozygous for patch contrasts with that produced by the five loci described above in that the duplicated region includes some naked cuticle anterior to each denticle band. The duplicated unit thus involves structures of two adjacent segments. Patch larvae, despite the normal number of denticle bands, have twice the normal number of segment boundaries.

Despite these differences, the common feature of all mutants in this class is that a defined fraction of the pattern in each segment is deleted. This deletion is associated with a mirror image duplication of the remaining part of the pattern. We suggest that these loci are involved in the specification of the basic pattern of the segmental units.

## Pair-rule mutants: deletions in alternating segments
In mutants of this class homologous parts of the pattern are deleted in every other segment. Each of the six loci is characterized by its own specific pattern of deletions. For example, in even-skipped larvae, the denticle bands and adjacent naked cuticle of the pro- and metathoracic, and the 2nd, 4th, 6th and 8th abdominal segments are lacking. This results in larvae with half the normal number of denticle bands separated by enlarged regions of naked cuticle. In paired larvae the apparent reduction in segment number results essentially from the deletion of the naked posterior part of the odd-numbered and the anterior denticle bands of the even-numbered segments. The double segments thus formed are composites of anterior mesothorax and posterior metathorax, anterior first abdominal and posterior second abdominal segment, etc. The identification of the regions present or deleted in mutant larvae is based on the phenotypes produced by alleles with lower expressivity. In such embryos the deletions are in general smaller and variable in size. In a 'leaky' allele of even-skipped, the denticle bands of the even-numbered segments are frequently incomplete, whereas in paired the pattern deletions often involve only part of the naked cuticle of the odd-numbered segments, leading to a pairwise fusion of denticle bands.

Further support for the composite nature of the segments in prd larvae was obtained in combinations with Ultrabithorax (Ubx), a homeotic mutation which when homozygous causes the transformation of the first abdominal segment into mesothorax. In such prd; Ubx larvae, only the denticle band of the first double segment in the abdomen is transformed. The posterior margin of this band and the naked cuticle which follows remain abdominal in character and lack, for example, the typical mesothoracic sense organs. The composite nature of the segments in paired shows that the establishment of segmental identity does not require the establishment of individual segments as such.

The segmentation pattern in prd; Ubx larvae is typical of that of paired alone and is not affected by the Ubx homeotic transformation. Similarly, in prd; Polycomb larvae the naked cuticle of alternating segments is deleted just as it is in paired alone, even though in Polycomb embryos all the thoracic and abdominal segments have an 8th abdominal character. These combinations, and similar ones with even-skipped, indicate that the observed grouping of segments in pairs depends on the position of segments within the segmental array rather than the segmental identity. These combinations thus provide evidence that mutations such as paired and even-skipped affect different processes from those altered in homeotic mutants.

Other mutants in this class show different deletion patterns. The phenotype of odd-skipped is similar to that of even-skipped. However, in this case it is the odd-numbered denticle bands that are affected. In odd-skipped, the deleted region is smaller and is restricted to a more posterior part of the segment than in even-skipped. Barrel has a phenotype similar to paired although the pattern is often less regular. Runt, on the X chromosome, is the only pair-rule mutant showing mirror-image duplications. Runt embryos have half the normal number of denticle bands, each a mirror-image duplication of the anterior part of a normal band. The bands in runt embryos, as well as the region of naked cuticle separating them, are of unequal sizes.

To the list of pair-rule loci we have added the engrailed locus. Lethal engrailed alleles lead to a substantial deletion of the posterior region of even-numbered segments. In addition, the anterior margin and adjacent cuticle of each segment are affected. Thus, the defect pattern in engrailed shows repeats which are spaced at both one- and two-segment intervals.

Each of the six different pair-rule loci affects a different region within a double segmental repeat. In no case does the margin of the deleted region coincide with a segment boundary. When the deleted region corresponds in size up to one entire segment it includes parts of two adjacent segments.

The phenotypes of the pair-rule mutants suggest that at some stage during normal development the embryo is organized in repeating units, the length of which corresponds to two segmental anlagen.

## Gap mutants: one continuous stretch of segments deleted
One of the striking features of the mutations of the first two classes is that the alteration in the pattern is repeated at specific intervals along the antero-posterior axis of the embryo. No such repeated pattern is found in mutants of the third class and instead a single group of up to eight adjacent segments is deleted from the final pattern. Three loci have been identified which cause such gaps in the pattern. Krüppel (Kr) was originally described by Gloor. Embryos homozygous for Kr lack thorax and anterior abdomen. The posterior-terminal region with the abdominal segments 8, 7 and 6 is normal, although probably somewhat enlarged. Anterior to the 6th abdominal segment is a plane of mirror-image symmetry followed by one further segment band with the character of a 6th segment oriented in reversed polarity. The exact position of the plane of symmetry varies and does not usually coincide with a segmental boundary. A large part of the Krüppel pattern is reminiscent of the pattern observed in embryos produced by the maternal-effect mutant bicaudal, although no maternal component is involved in the production of the Krüppel phenotype.

In the other two loci of this class, the gap in the pattern occurs in specific morphologically defined subregions of the larval pattern, in the thorax and in the abdomen, respectively. In hunchback, the meso- and metathoracic segments are deleted. In embryos homozygous for knirps, only two rather than eight denticle bands are formed in the abdomen. The posterior-terminal region including the 8th abdominal segment seems normal whereas the anterior abdominal denticle band is considerably enlarged. The anterior margin of the denticle band is morphologically similar to the first abdominal segment but combinations with Ubx show that the band is a composite with more than one segmental identity.

All three loci are required for a normal segmental subdivision of one continuous body region. The lack of a repeated pattern of defects suggests that the loci are involved in processes in which position along the antero-posterior axis of the embryo is defined by unique values.

## When are genes affecting segment number active?
The phenotypes described above are observed only in homozygous embryos, indicating that the loci identified by these mutations are active after fertilization and are crucial for the normal segmental organisation of the embryo. We have described the mutations in terms of their effect on the differentiated pattern. However, in many instances their effect can be observed much earlier in development. In normal embryos segmentation is first visible 1 h after the onset of gastrulation as a repeated pattern of bulges in the ventral ectoderm. In paired and even-skipped embryos the number of bulges is reduced and corresponds to the number of segments observed in the differentiated mutant embryos. Krüppel, runt and knirps embryos can be identified 15 min after the onset of gastrulation. All three mutations cause shorter germ bands, a phenomenon clearly related to the strong reduction in segment number observed in the differentiated larvae. Further evidence for an early activity at the paired locus was obtained using a temperature-sensitive allele. The extreme phenotype is only obtained when the embryo is kept at the restrictive temperature during the blastoderm stage. All these results indicate that the wild-type genes defined by the mutations are active before the end of gastrulation during normal development.

# Discussion
Segmentation in Drosophila proceeds by the transition from a single field into a repeated pattern of homologous smaller subfields. Mutant alleles at the 15 loci we have described interfere with this process at various points. Although each locus has its own distinct phenotype, we were able to distribute the mutations in three classes. In one class only a single large subregion of the embryo is affected, whereas in mutants of the other two classes a reiteration of defects is produced with a repeat length of one or two segments, respectively. This suggests that the process of segmentation involves three different units of spatial organization.

The organization of the egg is thought to be controlled by a monotonic gradient set up during oogenesis under the control of the maternal genome. All the mutants we have described depend on the embryonic rather than the maternal genome. None of them alters the overall polarity of the embryo, the head always being at the anterior and the telson at the posterior end of the egg. The most dramatic alterations of the pattern are produced in the gap mutants and involve one large subregion of the egg. Hunchback and knirps affect the development of thorax and abdomen, respectively, and might be involved in the establishment of these large morphologically unique subregions of the embryo. The large mirror-image duplications found in the posterior pattern of Krüppel embryos are similar to those of bicaudal. The bicaudal phenotype has been interpreted as resulting from an instability in the maternal gradient, and thus Krüppel might be involved in the maintenance of elaboration of this gradient in the posterior egg region after fertilization.

The smallest repeat unit, the individual segment, is affected in mutants at the six segment-polarity loci. The pattern alteration consists of a mirror-image duplication of part of the normal pattern with the remainder deleted. In these mutants the deleted region corresponds in size to more than half a segment. Mutations causing smaller deletions in the segmental pattern do not lead to polarity reversals. The mirror-image duplications produced by the pair-rule mutation runt are also associated with a deletion of more than half a repeat unit, that is, more than one segment. The tendency of partial fields containing less than half the positional values to duplicate is well described for imaginal disks in Drosophila, as well as for the larval epidermis in other insects. On the other hand, the same types of pattern duplication are also produced in conditions which do not involve cell death and regeneration, but rather a reorganization of the positional information in the entire field. More detailed studies of early development in mutant embryos may reveal which mechanism is responsible for the different mutant phenotypes.

Given the evidence for a homology between segments, the existence of a class of mutants affecting corresponding regions in each individual segment is perhaps not surprising. The discovery of a mutant class affecting corresponding regions in every other segment was not expected and suggests the existence at some time during development of homologous units with the size of two segmental anlagen. It is possible that the double segmental unit corresponds to transitory double segmental fields which are established early during embryogenesis and are later subdivided into individual segments. At the blastoderm stage the epidermal primordium giving rise to thorax and abdomen is only about 40 cells long. An initial subdivision into double segments would avoid problems of accuracy encountered in a simultaneous establishment of segment boundaries every three to four cells. A stepwise establishment of segments implies that the borders defining double segments be made before the intervening ones. The mutant phenotypes do not definitely show which, if any, of the segment borders define a primary double segmental division in normal development. The mutant phenotypes which come closest to a pattern one would expect if the transition from the double segment to the individual segment stage were blocked are the patterns of paired and even-skipped. Both suggest the frame meso- and metathorax, 1st and 2nd, 3rd and 4th abdominal segment, etc.

It is also possible that the double segmental units are never defined by distinct borders in normal development. The existence of a double segmental homology unit may merely reflect a continuous property such as a wave with a double segmental period responsible for correct spacing of segmental boundaries. We have not found any mutations showing a repeat unit larger than two segments. This may indicate that the subdivision of the blastoderm proceeds directly by the double segmental repeat with no larger intervening homology units. However, the failure to identify such larger units may reflect the incompleteness of our data.

Drosophila has been estimated to have about 5,000 genes and only a very small fraction of these when mutated result in a change of the segmental pattern of the larva. Some of the loci described here were known previously but only in the case of Krüppel has the embryonic lethal phenotype been recognized as affecting segmentation. The majority of the mutants described here have been isolated in systematic searches for mutations affecting the segmentation pattern of the Drosophila larva. These experiments are still incomplete. Most of the alleles on the second chromosome were isolated in one experiment which yielded an average allele frequency of four or five alleles per locus. From this yield and similar calculations for the third and first chromosomes, we estimate that we have identified almost all segmentation loci on the second chromosome and about 50% each of those on the third and first chromosome. Our sample of 15 loci should therefore represent the majority of the loci affecting segmentation in the Drosophila genome. Thus, in Drosophila it would seem feasible to identify all genetic components involved in the complex process of embryonic pattern formation.

Note added in proof: All known barrel alleles fail to complement hairy, suggesting that the barrel mutations are alleles at the hairy locus.
