# Abstract

After infection and a prolonged incubation period, the scrapie agent causes a degenerative disease of the central nervous system in sheep and goats. Six lines of evidence including sensitivity to proteases demonstrate that this agent contains a protein that is required for infectivity. Although the scrapie agent is irreversibly inactivated by alkali, five procedures with more specificity for modifying nucleic acids failed to cause inactivation. The agent shows heterogeneity with respect to size, apparently a result of its hydrophobicity; the smallest form may have a molecular weight of 50,000 or less. Because the novel properties of the scrapie agent distinguish it from viruses, plasmids, and viroids, a new term "prion" is proposed to denote a small proteinaceous infectious particle which is resistant to inactivation by most procedures that modify nucleic acids. Knowledge of the scrapie agent structure may have significance for understanding the causes of several degenerative diseases.

# Introduction

A major, unanswered question in molecular biology concerns the chemical structure of the scrapie agent. Until recently, mysteries surrounding the scrapie agent were so commonplace that investigators had come to accept rather than question its enigmatic properties. The scrapie agent causes a degenerative disorder of the central nervous system in sheep and goats.

The extraordinary resistance of the scrapie agent to formalin was responsible for the inadvertent inoculation of sheep in Scotland. Eighteen thousand animals were vaccinated against louping ill virus with a formalin-treated suspension of ovine brain and spleen that had been contaminated with the scrapie agent. Two years later, 1500 sheep developed scrapie. Subsequently, studies on CNS diseases of sheep provided the foundation for Sigurdsson's concept of slow infections. In 1959, Hadlow suggested that kuru, a CNS degenerative disease of New Guinea highlanders, might be similar to scrapie because the pathologies of these disorders share many features. The transmission of kuru to chimpanzees in 1965 by Gajdusek, Gibbs, and Alpers forced a major reconsideration of the etiology of all degenerative disorders and made scrapie a subject of intense medical interest. Subsequently, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), a progressive, presenile dementia, was shown to be caused by a transmissible agent.

A recent study suggests that there may be similarities between the agents causing scrapie and CJD. Goats inoculated with brain tissue from demented patients dying of CJD developed a neurological disorder 3 to 4 years after inoculation. Five out of ten CJD inocula have produced disease in goats. Experimental CJD in goats is indistinguishable both clinically and neuropathologically from natural scrapie. Monkeys have been used as a common experimental host for scrapie and CJD; curiously, chimpanzees are susceptible to CJD but not scrapie. Numerous attempts to link scrapie epidemiologically to CJD have been unsuccessful. At present, there is no direct evidence that the scrapie agent causes disease in humans.

In contrast to CJD which occurs worldwide, kuru is found only in a small mountainous region of Papua New Guinea. Epidemiological studies of kuru provide evidence for incubation periods of 20 to 30 years. Although considerable evidence implicates cannibalism in the spread of kuru, no direct observations of cannibalistic acts in the endemic region have been recorded. Attempts to transmit kuru by feeding infected brain tissue to chimpanzees have been unsuccessful although one monkey developed a kuru-like illness 36 months after oral ingestion of the kuru agent. In contrast, goats fed scrapie-infected tissue frequently develop disease. Recently, we have taken advantage of the natural cannibalistic activities of hamsters to develop an experimental model of scrapie transmitted by cannibalism. Oral transmission of the scrapie agent appears to be extremely inefficient. Cannibalism requires a dose of agent 10^9 times greater than that needed to produce scrapie by intracerebral injection. These results provide compelling evidence for oral transmission of the scrapie agent and may offer new insights into the spread of kuru by cannibalism among the Fore people and their neighboring tribes.

Hypotheses on the chemical structure of the scrapie agent have included: sarcosporidia parasite, filterable virus, small DNA virus, replicating protein, replicating abnormal polysaccharide within membranes, DNA subvirus controlled by a transmissible linkage substance, provirus consisting of recessive genes generating RNA particles, naked nucleic acid similar to plant viroids, unconventional virus, aggregated conventional virus with unusual properties, replicating polysaccharide, nucleoprotein complex, nucleic acid surrounded by a polysaccharide coat, spiroplasmalike organism, multicomponent system with one component quite small, and membrane-bound DNA.

# Methods

Studies on the scrapie, kuru, and CJD agents have been greatly limited by the slow, tedious, and costly bioassays used to detect these agents. Since tissue culture systems are not available for the replication and assay of these agents and they appear to be nonantigenic in their native forms, animal bioassays must be used. For many years all assays for the scrapie agent were performed in sheep and goats. In 1961, transmission of the scrapie agent to mice transformed research, but the murine end-point titration assay was still heroic. Quantifying a single sample required eight to ten serial tenfold dilutions and injection of each dilution into six mice. Then 50 to 60 mice were held for 1 year and examined weekly for signs of scrapie. The number of animals developing scrapie at the highest dilution was used to calculate an end point. The time required for titration of a sample was reduced to 200 days when a more rapid form of the disease in hamsters was discovered.

With hamsters, studies on the scrapie agent have been accelerated by development of a bioassay based on measurements of incubation time interval. It is now possible to assay samples with the use of four animals in 60 to 70 days if the titers of the scrapie agent are high.

Several investigators have mounted major efforts to purify and characterize the scrapie agent over the past two decades. Early studies suggested that the scrapie agent was distributed throughout virtually all subcellular fractions. Several different purification procedures have been reported. One involved copurification of the scrapie agent and microsomes. Another involved isolation of a membrane-free fraction after prolonged ultracentrifugation. This fraction contained 1 to 10 percent of the scrapie agent and was precipitated with ammonium sulfate. Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) gel electrophoresis was used to obtain a further purification.

Using equilibrium sucrose and sodium chloride density gradients, Siakotos, Gajdusek, Gibbs, and co-workers attempted to purify the scrapie agent from murine brain. Other studies from the laboratory of Gajdusek have shown considerable heterogeneity of the agent in metrizamide and cesium chloride density gradients. On the basis of the information derived from these sedimentation profiles, a partial purification scheme for the murine scrapie agent from spleen was derived.

We then developed an improved assay based on measurements of the incubation time. With this new bioassay, we created a purification scheme for the agent from hamster brain, where the titers are highest. Deoxycholate extracts were digested sequentially with micrococcal nuclease and proteinase K. The digestions were performed at 4°C to prevent aggregation of the agent, which is observed at elevated temperatures. The digested preparations were then subjected to cholate-Sarkosyl extraction followed by ammonium sulfate precipitation. Most of the remaining digested proteins and nucleic acids were separated from the scrapie agent by Sarkosyl agarose gel electrophoresis at 4°C. Such preparations of the eluted scrapie agent (E6) were 100- to 1000-fold purified with respect to cellular protein.

# Main

The kinetics of scrapie agent replication in hamsters and mice are well documented. After intracerebral inoculation of hamsters with 10^7 ID50 units, about 10^2 ID50 units can be recovered in the brain 24 hours later. During the next 50 days the amount of agent in the brain increases to 10^9 ID50 units. At this time the agent is widely distributed throughout the brain and no regional differences are apparent. During the next 10 to 15 days the animals develop ataxia, difficulty righting themselves from a supine position, generalized tremor, and head bobbing. By 60 to 70 days, vacuolation of neurons and astrogliosis are found throughout the brain, even though the titer of the agent remained constant. Thus, the pathological hallmarks of this spongiform encephalopathy do not correlate with the extent of agent replication. In addition, the spongiform pathology that characterizes kuru and CJD is inconspicuous in natural scrapie.

Heterogeneity of the scrapie agent with respect to size, density, and charge suggested that hydrophobic domains on its surface might be responsible for these phenomena. Such domains are usually formed by the juxtaposition of nonpolar side chains of amino acids within a protein. Fraction E6 contains 10^8.5 to 10^9.5 ID50 units of agent per milliliter, 20 to 50 μg of protein, less than 1 μg of DNA, and less than 10 μg of RNA. Each hamster brain contains 10^9 ID50 units of the scrapie agent and 100 mg of protein.

The hydrophobicity of the scrapie agent has complicated purification. Further evidence for the hydrophobicity of the scrapie agent comes from its binding to phenyl-Sepharose. The agent could not be eluted in 8.5M ethylene glycol; however, inclusion of 4 percent Nonidet P-40 and 2 percent Sarkosyl in the ethylene glycol eluate resulted in the almost quantitative recovery of the agent from phenyl-Sepharose. In addition, the hydrophobicity was reflected by diminished titers when detergent was removed from fraction E6.

Six separate and distinct lines of evidence show that the scrapie agent contains a protein that is required for infectivity: (i) inactivation as a result of digestion with proteinase K, (ii) inactivation by chemical modification with diethyl pyrocarbonate, (iii) inactivation by SDS, (iv) inactivation by chaotropic salts such as guanidinium thiocyanate, (v) inactivation by phenol, and (vi) inactivation by urea. Digestion with crystalline proteinase K inactivated the scrapie agent from hamster brain; the decrease in titer was a function of enzyme concentration, temperature, and time of digestion. Prior treatment of proteinase K with the protease inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF) completely abolished the protease-catalyzed degradation of the agent. Digestion with trypsin also destroyed the scrapie agent. Carbethoxylation by diethyl pyrocarbonate also inactivated the purified scrapie agent, but activity was restored by treatment with hydroxylamine. This reversibility of the inactive, chemically modified agent provides a further argument for a protein target. The scrapie agent is also inactivated by 10 mM butanedione and 2 mM PMSF.

Three reagents used to denature proteins and isolate biologically active nucleic acids also inactivate the agent. SDS diminished the scrapie agent titer when the ratio of SDS to protein exceeded 1.8. Studies with chaotropic ions have shown that in low concentrations they inactivate the agent. Irreversible inactivation of the agent was found upon exposure to 1M guanidinium thiocyanate at 4°C for 3 hours. Phenol also inactivates the scrapie agent. From all of these studies with chemical reagents that denature proteins but permit isolation of biologically active nucleic acids, we conclude that denaturation of a protein within the scrapie agent leads to inactivation of the infectious particle. Moreover, CJD agents adapted to guinea pigs and mice are also inactivated when extracted with phenol. Exposure of the scrapie agent in partially purified fractions to 3M urea at 4°C decreases the titer by a factor of 50.

In our search for a nucleic acid genome within the scrapie agent, we found that the titer of the scrapie agent is irreversibly reduced by alkali. The titer was reduced by a factor of 1000 on exposure to pH 10 for 1 hour at 4°C or by a factor of 100 on exposure to pH 9 for 1 hour at 37°C. Neutralization with acid did not restore infectivity. No loss of infectivity at pH 3 was observed over a 16-hour period at 37°C.

At several different stages of purification we have searched for susceptibility of the agent to nuclease digestion. No decrease in scrapie infectivity has been observed with micrococcal nuclease, nuclease P, deoxyribonucleases I and II, ribonucleases A and T, and phosphodiesterases I and II. Ribonucleases III and H also showed no effect. Addition of ribonuclease A at 0.1 μg/ml to a crude nucleic acid extract containing potato spindle tuber viroid (PSTV) decreased the PSTV titer by a factor of more than 10^6 in 1 hour at 25°C.

Studies with the optimally clear fraction E6 have confirmed the resistance of the scrapie agent to UV-inactivation. The survival of 37 percent of the scrapie agent in fractions P3 and E6 was observed after a UV dose of 42,000 J/m^2. Proteins are relatively resistant to irradiation at 254 nm and are probably the target within the scrapie agent in these irradiation studies.

The agent has been incubated at pH 7 in the presence of 2 mM Zn(NO3)2 at 65°C for periods as long as 24 hours without loss of infectivity. Under these conditions polymers of RNA are completely reduced to mononucleotides, and polymers of DNA undergo considerable hydrolysis. No inactivation of the scrapie agent was observed with psoralens of varying degrees of hydrophobicity over a wide range of dosages. At concentrations up to 0.5M at neutral pH hydroxylamine failed to alter scrapie agent infectivity.

Target calculations for ionizing radiation have given minimum molecular weights ranging from 64,000 to 150,000. Studies on the scrapie agent in murine spleen have shown a continuum of sizes ranging from 40S or less to more than 500S. Sarkosyl agarose gel electrophoresis of partially purified fractions showed that some forms migrated more slowly than DNA restriction endonuclease fragments of 15 x 10^6 daltons. Some smaller forms of the agent migrated ahead of 3 x 10^5 dalton DNA fragments. Incubation of the scrapie agent overnight with 10 percent sulfobetaine 3-14, a zwitterionic detergent, appears to have dissociated the agent. Under these conditions the scrapie agent eluted as a peak behind bovine serum albumin, but slightly ahead of ovalbumin. If the agent has a globular shape in sulfobetaine 3-14, then it may have a molecular size of 50,000 daltons or less.

# Discussion

The molecular properties of the scrapie agent differ from those of viruses, viroids, and plasmids. Its resistance to procedures that attack nucleic acids, its resistance to inactivation by heat, and its apparent small size all suggest that the scrapie agent is a novel infectious entity. Because the dominant characteristics of the scrapie agent resemble those of a protein, the term "prion" is suggested. Prions are small proteinaceous infectious particles which are resistant to inactivation by most procedures that modify nucleic acids. The term "prion" underscores the requirement of a protein for infection; current knowledge does not allow exclusion of a small nucleic acid within the interior of the particle.

Our data and that of other investigators suggest two possible models for the scrapie agent: (i) a small nucleic acid surrounded by a tightly packed protein coat or (ii) a protein devoid of nucleic acid, that is, an infectious protein. While the first model might seem the most plausible, there is no evidence for a nucleic acid within the agent. The second model is consistent with the experimental data but is clearly heretical. Determination of its molecular structure will be required prior to deciding whether prions represent a distinct subgroup of extraordinarily small viruses or a completely different type of pathogen which lacks a nucleic acid genome.

The first possibility for replication is that prions contain a protected nucleic acid and that, like a viral genome, it codes for the protein shell. Alternatively, prions may contain an oligonucleotide that acts as a regulatory element instead of a coding template. If the postulated nucleic acid within the scrapie agent does not code for the protein in its coat, then this would be a major feature distinguishing prions from viruses.

The second possibility is that prions are, in fact, devoid of nucleic acid. If cellular genes coding for the scrapie prion do exist, then they are highly regulated, not readily activated, and present in various mammalian cells ranging from mice to monkeys. An occasional activation of such cellular genes might explain the sporadic occurrence of CJD. The molecular mechanism by which prions might activate cellular genes which code for their biosynthesis is unknown. Alternatively, prions could code for their own biosynthesis. Unorthodox mechanisms such as reverse translation or protein-directed protein synthesis would allow prions to replicate. We have no precedents for either of these synthetic processes in biology.

The consequences of understanding the structure, function, and replication of prions are significant. A knowledge of the molecular structure of prions may help identify the etiologies of some chronic degenerative diseases of humans. Diseases where prions might play an etiological role include Alzheimer's senile dementia, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, and lupus erythematosus, as well as a variety of neoplastic disorders. The importance of prion research in the potential elucidation of a wide variety of medical illnesses underscores the need for purification of the scrapie agent to homogeneity and the subsequent identification of its macromolecular components. Only then can we determine with certainty whether or not prions are devoid of nucleic acid.
