# Abstract
The mechanisms that balance food intake and energy expenditure determine who will be obese and who will be lean. One of the molecules that regulates energy balance in the mouse is the obese (ob) gene. Mutation of ob results in profound obesity and type II diabetes as part of a syndrome that resembles morbid obesity in humans. The ob gene product may function as part of a signalling pathway from adipose tissue that acts to regulate the size of the body fat depot.

# Introduction
OBESITY is the commonest nutritional disorder in Western societies. More than three in ten adult Americans weigh at least 20% in excess of their ideal body weight. Increased body weight is an important public health problem because it is associated with type II diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia and certain cancers. Although obesity is often considered to be a psychological problem, there is evidence that body weight is physiologically regulated.
The molecular pathogenesis of obesity is unknown. To identify components of the physiological system controlling body weight, we have applied positional cloning technologies in an attempt to isolate mouse obesity genes. Five single-gene mutations in mice that result in an obese phenotype have been described. The first of the recessive obesity mutations, the obese mutation (ob), was identified in 1950. ob is a single gene mutation that results in profound obesity and type II diabetes as part of a syndrome that resembles morbid obesity in humans. Neither the primary defect nor the site of synthesis of the ob gene product is known. Cross-circulation experiments between mutant and wild-type mice suggest that ob mice are deficient for a blood-borne factor that regulates nutrient intake and metabolism, but the nature of this putative factor has not been determined.
We report the cloning and sequencing of the mouse ob gene and its human homologue. ob encodes a 4.5-kilobase (kb) adipose tissue messenger RNA with a highly conserved 167-amino-acid open reading frame. The predicted amino-acid sequence is 84% identical between human and mouse and has features of a secreted protein. A nonsense mutation in codon 105 has been found in the original congenic C57BL/6J ob/ob mouse strain, which expresses a twentyfold increase in ob mRNA. A second ob mutant, the co-isogenic SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J strain, does not synthesize ob RNA. These data suggest that the ob gene product may function as part of a signalling pathway from adipose tissue that acts to regulate the size of the body fat depot.
For the positional cloning of mutant genes from mammals, it is necessary first to obtain genetic and physical maps, then to isolate the gene and detect the mutation. Here we describe the successful use of this approach to identify the ob gene.

# Main
## Genetic and physical mapping of ob
The first ob mutation (carried on the congenic C57BL/6J ob/ob strain) was found proximal to the Microphthalmia (Mi) and waved-1 (wav-1) loci on proximal mouse chromosome 6; a second co-isogenic allele of ob has been identified in the SM/Ckc-Dac mouse strain.
We previously positioned ob relative to a series of molecular markers on mouse chromosome 6 and mapped the ob gene close to a restriction-fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) marker, D6Rck13, derived from chromosome microdissection; we also found that Pax4 in the proximal region of mouse chromosome 6 is tightly linked to ob. Both loci were initially used to type a total of 835 informative meioses derived from both interspecific and intersubspecific mouse crosses that were segregating ob. Pax4 was mapped proximal to ob and was recombinant in two animals; no recombination between D6Rck13 and ob was detected among the first 835 meioses scored.
To isolate the ob gene we cloned the DNA in the region of Pax4 and D6Rck13, using both probes to start the construction of a physical map in the region of ob. Yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs) corresponding to Pax4 and D6Rck13 were isolated and characterized. Centromeric and telomeric ends of each YAC were recovered, and ends mapping closer to ob used to screen for new YACs. YAC ends were recovered using either vectorette polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or the plasmid end-rescue technique. One of the ends of a D6Rck13 YAC, 902A0653, was recombinant in animal 257, positioning ob between this YAC end and Pax4. We were unable to recover any YACs linking the ends of YACs yB1S4A5 and 902A0653. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) indicated that there was a ~70-kb gap separating the two YAC ends. To bridge this gap, we used both YAC ends to isolate a set of mouse P1 clones. Analysis of the ends of these P1 clones showed that they overlapped and that the gap in the YAC contig was ~70 kb. The size of the contig spanning the ob locus was 2.2 megabases (Mb) and ob was localized to the 900 kb between the distal end of YAC 903E1016 and the distal end of YAC 902A0653.
To position ob more precisely, we genotyped an additional 771 meioses derived from both a C57BL/6J ob/ob x DBA/2J intercross and backcross. The typing of the intraspecific crosses required the development of informative single-strand length polymorphisms (SSLPs) for both D6Rck13 and Pax4. Sequencing of the Pax4 gene itself revealed a microsatellite sequence, and an SSLP near D6Rck13, D6Rck39, was identified by sequencing cosmid subclones from YAC y902A0653 (a YAC isolated with D6Rck13). PCR amplification of genomic DNA with primers flanking these microsatellites revealed polymorphisms among the various progenitor strains of the genetic crosses. No additional recombinants between ob and Pax4 were identified after genotyping the obese backcross and intercross progeny from the crosses to DBA mice. The genetic results indicated that D6Rck39 was distal to ob and recombined with ob in a single obese animal derived from the C57BL/6J ob/ob x DBA/2J backcross, animal 167. This recombination occurred between D6Rck39 and the distal end of YAC yB6S2F12 because a B x D polymorphism defined by this end indicated that it was non-recombinant in animal 167 as well as animals 111 and 420. Thus the distal end of YAC yB6S2F12 failed to recombine with ob among the 1,606 meioses scored. As recombination in animal 111 was localized between this end and the distal end of YAC y902E1016, the combined data from animals 111 and 167 placed ob in, at most, a 650-kb interval between D6Rck39 and the distal end of YAC 903E1016. The exact size of the critical region could not be determined until the points of recombination in these animals were precisely localized. Fine mapping of these recombination events was not necessary. There was a total of 6 recombination events in this region.
To facilitate the identification of genes in the region of ob, we isolated P1 clones using the ends of the YACs in this region as well as the ends derived from the initial set of P1 clones. Twenty-four P1 clones were used to construct a contig across most of the 650-kb critical region of ob.

## Gene identification
Genes from this 650-kb interval were isolated using the method of exon trapping. DNA from individual or pools of P1 clones was subcloned as BamHI/BglII digests into the pSPL3 exon trapping vector. Briefly, each exon trapping product was sequenced and compared to all sequences in GenBank using the BLAST computer programme. Putative exons were screened for the presence of corresponding RNA from a variety of tissues using Northern blots and reverse-transcription PCR. Six genes were identified: four mapped within the 650-kb critical region of ob and two to outside this region.
One of the trapped exons, 2G7, was hybridized to a Northern blot of mouse tissues and detected a ~4.5-kb RNA only in white adipose tissue. This exon was derived from a P1 isolated with the distal end of yB6S2F12 YAC. Even when autoradiographs were exposed for up to a week, no signal was detected in any other tissue, but we cannot exclude the possibility that this gene may be expressed elsewhere or below the level of detection in some tissues. Actin mRNA was detected in all samples. Apparent adipose-tissue-specific expression was also seen after RT-PCR of RNA from a variety of tissues using specific primers from the 2G7 exon, with a strong signal being seen only in white fat and actin being detectable in all tissues tested. The high level of expression of 2G7 in adipose tissue suggested that this exon might be derived from the ob gene.
The level of expression of the 2G7 exon was then assayed in the two available ob strains by hybridization to Northern blots as well as by RT-PCR. Northern blots showed that 2G7 RNA was absent in SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J adipose tissue. This lack of 2G7 RNA in these animals was demonstrated by RT-PCR of the fat cell RNA, as shown by the absence of a signal after thirty cycles of amplification. As the ob2J mutation is relatively recent and is maintained as a co-isogenic strain, these data indicate that 2G7 encodes an exon from the ob gene. This was confirmed by characterization of the mutation in C57BL/6J ob/ob mice. Northern blots of adipose tissue RNA from C57BL/6J ob/ob mice showed a ~20-fold increase in the level of ob RNA, suggesting that the original ob allele (C57BL/6J ob/ob) was associated with a non-functional gene product and that the mRNA was increased as part of a possible feedback loop. This turned out to be the case as the C57BL/6J ob/ob phenotype is the result of a nonsense mutation.

## Sequence of the ob gene
The 2G7 exon was used to isolate a total of 22 complementary DNA (cDNA) clones from a mouse adipose tissue cDNA library. None of the cDNA clones extended more than 97 base pairs upstream of 2G7, whereas each extended a variable distance downstream. Sequencing of the cDNA clones revealed a methionine initiation codon in the 2G7 exon, with a 167-amino-acid open reading frame followed by a long 3'-untranslated sequence. A potential Kozak translation initiation consensus sequence was present with an adenosine residue three bases upstream of the ATG. One of the cDNA clones extended to the 5' end of the mRNA because its sequence was identical to that of the 5' RACE (rapid amplification of cloned ends) products of adipose tissue RNA. A total of 2.9 kb of cDNA sequence is shown, most of which is 3'-untranslated sequence. A search for internal homology within the cDNA revealed a 50-base-pair (bp) direct repeat in both the 5' and 3' untranslated sequence; this sequence was not found in GenBank and there were no additional segments of internal homology.
Two classes of cDNA were found which differed by inclusion or exclusion of a single glutamine codon. This residue is found in a position immediately 3' to the splice acceptor of the 2G7 exon. As the CAG codon of glutamine includes a possible AG splice-acceptor sequence, there appears to be slippage at the splice-acceptor site, with an apparent 3-bp deletion in a subset of the cDNAs. This glutamine residue is located in a highly conserved region of the molecule but its significance is unknown.
To identify the mutation in C57BL/6J ob/ob mice, RT-PCR products from the entire open reading frame (ORF) were prepared from adipose tissue RNA from this mutant and both strands sequenced. The coding sequences were identical apart from a C->T mutation in C57BL/6J ob/ob mice that results in a change of an arginine at position 105 to a stop codon. This base change did not occur in genomic DNA from V/Le or C57BL/10 mice, the strains in which this mutation was carried before it was transferred to C57BL/6J. DNA sequence changes from CGA to TGA are not uncommon as a result of the high mutation rate of methyl cytosine to thymidine. This ob mutation is presumed to inactivate the protein as the phenotype in both C57BL/6J and SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J mice is identical.
A database search of the ob protein using the BLAST program identified no significant homology to any sequences in GenBank. The predicted polypeptide was largely hydrophilic and had a putative N-terminal signal sequence. Amino-acid sequence analysis using the sigseq computer program indicated a 98% likelihood that a signal sequence was present at the N-terminus. The predicted signal sequence cleavage site is C-terminal to an alanine at position 21. Computer analysis of the human protein also suggests that it has an N-terminal signal sequence, so human and mouse ob may both encode secreted proteins. There is some divergence in the mouse and human signal sequences, but both give identical scores when analysed using sigseq. To confirm the presence of a functional signal sequence, a human cDNA that included the entire ORF was subcloned into a pGEM vector. Positive-strand human ob RNA was transcribed using SP6 polymerase and translated in vitro with and without canine pancreatic microsomal membranes. The primary translation product migrated with an apparent relative molecular mass of ~18K, consistent with that predicted from the cDNA sequence. Inclusion of microsomal membranes in the reaction inhibited translation ~5-fold, but about half of the ob primary translation product was truncated by ~2K in the presence of microsomal membranes, which suggests that the signal sequence is functional. To confirm that the ob protein had been translocated, we treated in vitro translation products with proteinase K, which caused complete proteolysis of the 18K primary translation product whereas the 16K processed form was unaffected, indicating that the translation product had been translocated into the microsomal lumen. Permeabilization of the membranes with Triton X-100 rendered the processed form protease-sensitive and is compatible with the hypothesis that ob is a secreted molecule. After signal-sequence cleavage, two cysteine residues would remain within the predicted protein, suggesting that the molecule may contain the disulphide bond characteristic of other secreted polypeptides. Amino-acid sequence and secondary structure prediction support a globular structure for the protein. The largely hydrophilic amino-acid sequence had no notable structural motifs or membrane-spanning domains other than the N-terminal signal sequence. We find no consensus for N-linked glycosylation or dibasic amino-acid sequences indicative of protein cleavage in the predicted processed protein.

## The ob 2 J mutation
We next explored the molecular basis for the mutation in SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J mice. In these animals, the absence of 2G7 RNA was associated with an increase in the size of an ~9 kb BglII fragment of genomic DNA in affected animals. Although the precise nature of this polymorphism is not established, the altered BglII site maps ~7 kb upstream of the mRNA start site for the 4.5 kb ob RNA, suggesting that this mutation may be the result of a structural alteration or sequence variation in the promoter. None of the other restriction fragments reach the promoter region. Nevertheless, this polymorphism is significant because it is always associated with the obese phenotype in a colony that segregates the ob2J mutation. In this experiment, DNA from a total of six obese and five lean animals was Southern-blotted after BglII digestion and probed with 2G7. In each case homozygosity for the larger of the polymorphic BglII fragments was associated with an obese phenotype. Each of the lean animals was either homozygous for the smaller BglII allele (+/+) or heterozygous (ob/+). As reported, no overt phenotypic differences were apparent between +/+ and ob/+ mice.

## ob sequence conservation
The coding sequence of the ob gene was hybridized to genomic Southern blots of vertebrate DNAs. Even at moderate stringency, there were detectable signals in all vertebrate DNAs tested, demonstrating that ob is highly conserved among vertebrates. To determine the extent of this ob sequence conservation, we isolated and sequenced cDNA clones hybridizing to ob from a human adipose tissue cDNA library. The nucleotide sequences from human and mouse were highly homologous in the predicted coding sequence, but had only 30% homology in the available 5' and 3' untranslated regions. Homology of the human polypeptide apparent N-terminal signal sequence to the mouse equivalent region was slightly lower than in the rest of the molecule. The signal sequence is seen to be functional from the truncation of the primary translation product in the presence of canine pancreas microsomal membranes. Alignment of the predicted human and mouse amino-acid sequences shows that there is 84% overall identity and more extensive identity in the N-terminus of the mature protein, with only four conservative and three non-conservative substitutions among the residues between the signal sequence cleavage site and the conserved cysteine at position 117. As in mouse, 30% of the clones were missing a glutamine at codon 49.

# Discussion
Obesity has been a focus of discussion, with a line of research dating back to Lavoisier and Laplace (1783) implying that energy balance-food intake versus energy output-is physiologically regulated. The site of this regulation has been the subject of nearly one hundred years of debate. Of the brain regions implicated in the regulation of feeding behaviour, the ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH) is considered to be the most important satiety centre in the central nervous system (CNS). The increase in body weight associated with VMH lesions is a result of both increased food intake and decreased energy expenditure.
The energy balance in mammals was therefore postulated to be controlled by a feedback loop in which the amount of stored energy is sensed by the hypothalamus, which adjusts food intake and energy expenditure to maintain a constant body weight. The nature of the inputs to the hypothalamus was unclear. According to the lipostasis theory, the size of the body fat depot is regulated by the CNS, with a product of fat metabolism circulating in plasma and affecting energy balance by interacting with the hypothalamus. The glucostasis theory suggested that the plasma glucose level is a key signal regulating energy stores. A third possibility is that body temperature is an important input to the CNS centres controlling food intake. The inability to identify the putative signal from fat has hindered the validation of the lipostasis theory. Moreover, neither the glucostasis theory nor theories on the thermal regulation of food intake fully account for the precision with which energy balance is regulated in vivo. The possibility that at least one component of the signalling system circulates in the bloodstream was first suggested by Hervey, who showed that the transfer of blood from an animal with a VMH lesion across a vascular graft to an untreated animal (a parabiosis experiment) resulted in a reduction of food intake in the intact animal. The biochemical nature of the putative signal has remained elusive, although it has been suggested that ob is responsible for the generation of this blood-borne factor.
Our results, particularly the evidence that the ob protein product is secreted, suggest that ob may encode this circulating factor. Evidence that the gene described here is ob includes the identification of a nonsense mutation in the C57BL/6J ob/ob strain and a genomic alteration in the SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J strain that is associated with an absence of RNA. The data showing that one strain overproduces ob RNA while the other fails to express this gene, make it unlikely that these changes are secondary. This conclusion can be confirmed using transgenic mice to complement the obese mutation. The nature of the mutation in the co-isogenic SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J mice is as yet unknown. Preliminary analysis of the gene structure has indicated that the polymorphic BglII site maps ~7 kb upstream of the promoter. As this mutation is co-isogenic, the data strongly suggest that this polymorphism is associated with the mutation, although it is not yet clear whether there is a structural alteration (insertion or deletion) or base change. Further studies will be required to identify the molecular basis for the absence of ob RNA expression in SM/Ckc-Dac ob2J/ob2J mice, as well as the molecular mechanisms that result in the increased expression of ob RNA in C57BL/6J ob/ob mice.
The increased level of ob RNA in the C57BL/6J mutant, which has greatly increased fat cell mass, raises the possibility that the level of expression of this gene signals the size of the adipose depot. This hypothesis is consistent with the lipostasis theory, implying that an increase in the level of the ob signal (as might occur after a prolonged binge of eating) may act directly or indirectly on the CNS to inhibit food intake and/or regulate energy expenditure as part of a homeostatic mechanism to maintain constancy of the adipose mass. Such effects could be explained if the ob protein activated the sympathetic nervous system via interactions with the VMH. Direct effects of ob on the CNS would require that mechanisms exist to allow its passage across the blood-brain barrier. The means by which the CNS effects changes in body weight remain to be elucidated and may include mechanisms independent of effects on food intake and energy expenditure. In addition, ob may have endocrine, paracrine and autocrine effects on different tissues. These and other possibilities will be testable if the active form of the ob protein can be shown to circulate in plasma.
The ob mutation is associated with a myriad of hormonal and metabolic alterations. These include effects on thermoregulation, fertility, adrenal and thyroid function as well as a wide range of biochemical abnormalities. Although we cannot exclude the possibility that many of these pleiotypic effects are the result of the expression of ob in sites not included in our initial survey of mouse tissues, the apparent expression of ob in only adipose tissue suggests that many of these changes are secondary. It has been suggested that the complex ob phenotype reflects an imbalance in the activity of the autonomic nervous system with low sympathetic and high parasympathetic tone. If ob is a signal molecule that regulates body weight, it may act by interacting with CNS (and other) receptors to modulate food intake and the activity of the autonomic nervous system. Parabiosis experiments suggest that the ob receptor is encoded by the mouse db (diabetes) gene, a possibility that can be tested by positional cloning of db or by expression cloning and mapping of the ob receptor.
The extensive homology of the ob gene product among vertebrates suggests that its function is highly conserved. Now that the human homologue of ob is cloned, it will be possible to test for mutations in the human ob gene. As ob heterozygotes have an enhanced ability to survive a prolonged fast, heterozygous mutations at ob may provide a selective advantage in human populations subjected to caloric deprivation. Identification of ob now offers an entry point into the pathways that regulate adiposity and body weight and should provide a fuller understanding of the pathogenesis of obesity.

# Methods
YAC clones were isolated by PCR screening or hybridization to high-density filters of available mouse YAC libraries. The YACs from ICRF begin with a 902 prefix. YAC clones were sized on a CHEF MAPPER (Bio-Rad). Restriction enzyme digestions were done according to the manufacturers recommendations. YAC ends were recovered using vectorette PCR and plasmid end rescue. P1 clones were isolated by sending specific pairs of PCR primers to Genome Systems Inc (St Louis, MO) who provided single picks of individual mouse P1 clones. P1 ends were recovered using vectorette PCR. Cosmid subclones from YAC y902A0653 were isolated as described. Primer selection and PCR amplification of simple sequence repeats were performed as described: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 3 min, 25 cycles of 94° for 1 min, 55° for 2 min and 72° for 3 min. Primer sequences for Pax4: Pax4F, 5'-GGAGGTAGAGATGGCAGCAG-3'; Pax4R, 5'-ACAGAAAGCAAGGAGGATTTC-3', with a product size of 126 bp. Primer sequences for D6Rck39 were: 39GTF, 5'-GCACACTGACAGTGCCCTTA-3'; 39GTR, 5'-TGTAACCTGGAATTGGGAGC-3' with a product size of 128 bp. The breeding and maintenance of the various mouse crosses have been described.
Exon trapping was done by ligating BglII/BamHI digestion products of a pool of P1 clones into the pSPL3 vector as described. Total RNA was prepared and electrophoresed in formaldehyde gels. Northern blots were transferred to Immobilon and hybridized to radiolabelled probes as described. Reverse-transcription PCR reactions were performed using 100 ng total RNA. First-strand cDNA, prepared using random hexamers as primers, was PCR-amplified using primers derived from the 2G7 exon as well as mouse actin. The primers used to detect 2G7 were selected using the Primer program and were: 2G7F (5'CCAGGGCAGGAAAATGTG3'): 2G7R (5'CATCCTGGACTTTCTGGATAGG3'). The mouse actin primers were purchased from Clontech. PCR amplification was performed for 30 cycles with 94° denaturation for 1 min, 55° hybridization for 1 min, and 72° extensions for 2 min with a 1-s autoextension per cycle. RT-PCR products were resolved in a 1.5% low-melting-point agarose (Gibco/BRL) gel run in 0.5 x TBE buffer.
DNA inserts were prepared directly from phage DNA or by PCR amplification of the insert using primers from the λgt10 cloning site. PCR products were prepared for sequencing after electrophoresis in low-melting-point agarose gels using agarase. DNA was sequenced manually or using an ABI 373A automated sequencer. 5' RACE was done after dG tailing of first-strand cDNA using terminal transferase followed by PCR amplification with the reverse complement of the 2G7F primer and oligo(dC)18. Alignment of the phage insert was carried out using primers adjacent to the cloning site of λgt11. PCR products were sequenced directly. Plus-strand RNA was synthesized using SP6 polymerase.
