# A Bacterium That Can Grow by Using Arsenic Instead of Phosphorus

# Abstract
Life is mostly composed of the elements carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus. Although these six elements make up nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids and thus the bulk of living matter, it is theoretically possible that some other elements in the periodic table could serve the same functions. Here, we describe a bacterium, strain GFAJ-1 of the Halomonadaceae, isolated from Mono Lake, California, that is able to substitute arsenic for phosphorus to sustain its growth. Our data show evidence for arsenate in macromolecules that normally contain phosphate, most notably nucleic acids and proteins. Exchange of one of the major bio-elements may have profound evolutionary and geochemical importance.

# Introduction
Biological dependence on the six major nutrient elements carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus (P) is complemented by a selected array of other elements, usually metals or metalloids present in trace quantities that serve critical cellular functions, such as enzyme co-factors. There are many cases of these trace elements substituting for one another. A few examples include the substitution of tungsten for molybdenum and cadmium for zinc in some enzyme families and copper for iron as an oxygen-carrier in some arthropods and mollusks. In these examples and others, the trace elements that interchange share chemical similarities that facilitate the swap. However, there are no prior reports of substitutions for any of the six major elements essential for life. Here, we present evidence that arsenic can substitute for phosphorus in the biomolecules of a naturally occurring bacterium.

Arsenic (As) is a chemical analog of P, which lies directly below P on the periodic table. Arsenic possesses a similar atomic radius, as well as near identical electronegativity to P. The most common form of P in biology is phosphate (PO4^3-), which behaves similarly to arsenate (AsO4^3-) over the range of biologically relevant pH and redox gradients. The physicochemical similarity between AsO4^3- and PO4^3- contributes to the biological toxicity of AsO4^3- because metabolic pathways intended for PO4^3- cannot distinguish between the two molecules and AsO4^3- may be incorporated into some early steps in the pathways. However, it is thought that downstream metabolic processes are generally not compatible with As-incorporating molecules because of differences in the reactivities of P and As compounds. These downstream biochemical pathways may require the more chemically stable P-based metabolites; the lifetimes of more easily hydrolyzed As-bearing analogs are thought to be too short. However, given the similarities of As and P—and by analogy with trace element substitutions—we hypothesized that AsO4^3- could specifically substitute for PO4^3- in an organism possessing mechanisms to cope with the inherent instability of AsO4^3- compounds. Here, we experimentally tested this hypothesis by using AsO4^3-, combined with no added PO4^3-, to select for and isolate a microbe capable of accomplishing this substitution.

# Main
Mono Lake, located in eastern California, is a hypersaline and alkaline water body with high dissolved arsenic concentrations. We used lake sediments as inocula into an aerobic defined artificial medium at pH 9.8 containing 10 mM glucose, vitamins, and trace metals but no added PO4^3- or any additional complex organic supplements (such as yeast extract or peptone), with a regimen of increasing AsO4^3- additions initially spanning the range from 100 μM to 5 mM. These enrichments were taken through many decimal-dilution transfers, greatly reducing any potential carryover of autochthonous phosphorus. The background PO4^3- in the medium was 3.1 (± 0.3) μM on average, with or without added AsO4^3-, coming from trace impurities in the major salts. The sixth transfer of the 5 mM AsO4^3- (no added PO4^3-) condition was closely monitored and demonstrated an approximate growth rate (μ) of 0.1 day^-1. After 10^-7 dilutions, we used the 5 mM AsO4^3- enrichment to inoculate an agar plate that contained the same chemical composition as the artificial medium. An isolated colony was picked from the agar plates and reintroduced into an artificial liquid medium with no added PO4^3-, where we then progressively increased the AsO4^3- concentration to determine the optimal level for growth. Currently, this isolate—strain GFAJ-1 identified by 16S ribosomal RNA sequence phylogeny as a member of the Halomonadaceae family of Gammaproteobacteria—is maintained aerobically with 40 mM AsO4^3-, 10 mM glucose, and no added PO4^3- (+As/-P condition). Members of this family have been previously shown to accumulate intracellular As.

GFAJ-1 grew at an average μ_max of 0.53 day^-1 under +As/-P, increasing by over 20-fold in cell numbers after 6 days. It also grew faster and more extensively with the addition of 1.5 mM PO4^3- (-As/+P, μ_max of 0.86 day^-1). However, when neither AsO4^3- nor PO4^3- was added no growth was observed. We include both optical density and direct cell counts to unambiguously demonstrate growth using two independent methods. Cells grown under +As/-P were oblong and approximately 2 by 1 μm when imaged by means of scanning electron microscopy. When grown under +As/-P conditions, GFAJ-1 cells had more than 1.5-fold greater intracellular volume (≈ 2.5 ± 0.4 μm^3) as compared with that of -As/+P (≈ 1.5 ± 0.5 μm^3). Transmission electron microscopy revealed large vacuole-like regions in +As/-P-grown cells that may account for this increase in size. These experiments demonstrated AsO4^3--dependent growth, morphological differences in GFAJ-1 driven by AsO4^3- in the growth medium, and that the level of PO4^3- impurities in the medium was insufficient to elicit growth in the control (-As/-P).

To determine whether GFAJ-1 was taking up AsO4^3- from the medium, we measured the intracellular As content by means of inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). In +As/-P-grown cells, the mean intracellular As was 0.19 ± 0.25% by dry weight, whereas the cells contained only 0.019 ± 0.009% P by dry weight. This P was presumably scavenged from trace PO4^3- impurities in the reagents and not likely due to carryover, given our enrichment and isolation strategy. Moreover, when grown +As/-P this intracellular P is 96.5% less than our measured P values for this microbe when grown -As/+P and far below the 1 to 3% P by dry weight required to support growth in a typical heterotrophic bacterium. In contrast, GFAJ-1 cells grown under -As/+P conditions had a mean P content of 0.54 ± 0.21% by dry weight. There was variation in the total As content of the +As/-P cells, which is possibly a result of collection during stationary phase and losses during the repeated centrifugations and washing cycles because of the potential instability of the cellular structures given their swollen state. In contrast, the integrity of the -As/+P cells appeared robust, and thus intracellular P measured for these cells probably reflects their content. However, the low total intracellular P in +As/-P cells was consistently far below the quantity needed to support growth, suggesting that these low values are correct despite variation in data from the +As/-P cells. Low intracellular P in concert with high intracellular As was further confirmed through high-resolution secondary ion mass spectrometry and x-ray analyses, as discussed below.

We used radiolabeled ^73AsO4^3- to obtain more specific information about the intracellular distribution of arsenic. We observed intracellular arsenic in protein, metabolite, lipid, and nucleic acid cellular fractions. Stationary phase cells incorporated approximately one-tenth of the total intracellular ^73AsO4^3- label into nucleic acids but more than three quarters of the ^73AsO4^3- into the phenol extracted 'protein' fraction, with a small fraction going into lipids. We caution that the large 'protein' fraction is probably an overestimate because this extraction step likely contains numerous small, non-proteinaceous metabolites as well. To determine whether this distribution pattern reflected a use of AsO4^3- in place of PO4^3- in DNA, we estimated the average sequenced bacterial genome to be 3.8 megabase pairs (Mbp), which would contain approximately 7.5 × 10^6 atoms or 12.5 × 10^-18 moles of P. Assuming one complete genome per cell, this would equal 0.39 fg of P in the genome. Using ICP-MS, we measured about 9.0 fg P per cell in the -As/+P condition, which implies that only ~4% of total intracellular P is associated with the genome. Because these cells were harvested in stationary phase, the fraction of P associated with RNA is likely small. Hence, roughly 96% of P is presumably distributed between the 'lipid' and 'protein' fractions. If AsO4^3- is substituting for PO4^3- in DNA, then we can assume that roughly the same fraction of the total intracellular AsO4^3- would reflect a similar distribution to our estimated PO4^3- distribution. The distribution of intracellular ^73AsO4^3- in our experiments was consistent with these estimates. If AsO4^3- is fulfilling the biological role of PO4^3-, then AsO4^3- should act in many analogous biochemical roles, including DNA, protein phosphorylation, small molecular weight metabolites [such as arsenylated analogs of the reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH), ATP, and others].

Our data suggested that As was present in a number of biomolecules, and in particular we sought to confirm the presence of As in the DNA fraction. Initially, we measured traces of As with ICP-MS analysis of extracted nucleic acid and protein/metabolite fractions from +As/-P-grown cells. We then used high-resolution secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS) to identify As in extracted, gel-isolated genomic DNA. These data showed that DNA from +As/-P cells had elevated As and low P relative to DNA from the -As/+P cells. NanoSIMS analysis of the DNA showed that the As:P ratio on an atom-per-atom basis was significantly higher in the +As/-P versus -As/+P grown cells. Whether expressed as an ion ratio relative to C (^75As-:^12C-), or ^31P-:^12C-, or normalized by relative ion yield and expressed as a concentration in parts per billion, we saw a similarly consistent trend, with significantly higher As in the +As/-P DNA and higher P in the -As/+P DNA. In both cases, the nonamended element concentration was equal or less than background levels. These measurements therefore specifically demonstrated that the purified DNA extracted from +As/-P cells contained As. Our NanoSIMS analyses, combined with the evidence for intracellular arsenic by ICP-MS and our radiolabeled ^73AsO4^3- experiments, indicated that intracellular AsO4^3- was incorporated into key biomolecules, specifically DNA.

We next used synchrotron x-ray studies to determine the speciation and chemical environment of the intracellular arsenic. Micro-x-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (μXANES) of +As/-P-grown cells exhibited an absorption edge characteristic of As(V) coordination with no evidence of As(III) observed. Best fits of the micro-extended x-ray absorption fine structure (μEXAFS) spectra showed the first neighbor shell around the arsenic in +As/-P cells consisted of four oxygen ligands but had a second shell that is inconsistent with our As-Fe and As-S models, free AsO4^3- ions, or published spectra for organo-arsenicals. Although other arsenical compounds such as dimethylarsinate (DMA) also have As-O and As-C bonds, they have edge positions that are shifted to lower energy from the observed As(V) and have much shorter observed As-C bond distances. In contrast to the models, these As-O and As-C distances are consistent with that reported from the solved crystal structure of DNA for the analogous structural position of P relative to O and C atoms. Therefore, our x-ray data support the position of AsO4^3- in a similar configuration to PO4^3- in a DNA backbone or potentially other biomolecules as well. These data are also consistent with the presence of AsO4^3- in small-molecular-weight metabolites (for example, arsenylated analogs of NADH, ATP, glucose, and acetyl-CoA) as well as arsenylated proteins in which AsO4^3- would substitute for PO4^3- at serine, tyrosine, and threonine residues. Micro-x-ray fluorescence data (μXRF) further confirmed our ICP-MS measurements and showed low background P, which contrasted with regions of high arsenic correlated with high iron and zinc. These latter two elements are routinely used as proxies for the presence of proteins and other cellular material. Although the x-ray studies provided information about the average coordination of arsenic, our data identified a mixture of compounds in the cells. These results indicated that these compounds are dominated by arsenic(V)-oxygen-carbon-coordinated structures, and thus the bonding environment we described is consistent with our NanoSIMS data and can be attributed to DNA. These data show that As is in the +5 redox state and bound to O and distal C atoms within acceptable covalent bond lengths, identifying AsO4^3- assimilated into biomolecules within the cells in specifically relevant coordination.

# Discussion
Our data show arsenic-dependent growth by GFAJ-1. Growth was accompanied by AsO4^3- uptake and assimilation into biomolecules including nucleic acids, proteins, and metabolites. In some organisms, arsenic induces specific resistance genes to cope with its toxicity, whereas some dissimilatory arsenic-utilizing microbes can conserve energy for growth from the oxidation of reduced arsenic species, or 'breathe' AsO4^3-, as a terminal electron acceptor. Our study differs because we used As as a selective agent and excluded P, a major requirement in all hitherto known organisms. However, GFAJ-1 is not an obligate arsenophile and grew considerably better when provided with P. Although AsO4^3- esters are predicted to be orders of magnitude less stable than PO4^3- esters, at least for simple molecules, GFAJ-1 can cope with this instability. The vacuole-like regions observed in GFAJ-1 cells when growing under +As/-P conditions are potentially poly-β-hydroxybutyrate rich, which may stabilize As(V)-O-C type structures because nonaqueous environments appear to promote slower hydrolysis rates for related compounds. We propose that intracellular regions or mechanisms that exclude water may also promote this stability.

We report the discovery of an unusual microbe, strain GFAJ-1, that exceptionally can vary the elemental composition of its basic biomolecules by substituting As for P. How As insinuates itself into the structure of biomolecules is unclear, and the mechanisms by which such molecules operate are unknown.
