Stimulus-triggered fate conversion of somatic cells into pluripotency

# Abstract
Here we report a unique cellular reprogramming phenomenon, called stimulus-triggered acquisition of pluripotency (STAP), which requires neither nuclear transfer nor the introduction of transcription factors. In STAP, strong external stimuli such as a transient low-pH stressor reprogrammed mammalian somatic cells, resulting in the generation of pluripotent cells. Through real-time imaging of STAP cells derived from purified lymphocytes, as well as gene rearrangement analysis, we found that committed somatic cells give rise to STAP cells by reprogramming rather than selection. STAP cells showed a substantial decrease in DNA methylation in the regulatory regions of pluripotency marker genes. Blastocyst injection showed that STAP cells efficiently contribute to chimaeric embryos and to offspring via germline transmission. We also demonstrate the derivation of robustly expandable pluripotent cell lines from STAP cells. Thus, our findings indicate that epigenetic fate determination of mammalian cells can be markedly converted in a context-dependent manner by strong environmental cues.

# Introduction
In the canalization view of Waddington's epigenetic landscape, fates of somatic cells are progressively determined as cellular differentiation proceeds, like going downhill. It is generally believed that reversal of differentiated status requires artificial physical or genetic manipulation of nuclear function such as nuclear transfer or the introduction of multiple transcription factors. Here we investigated the question of whether somatic cells can undergo nuclear reprogramming simply in response to external triggers without direct nuclear manipulation. This type of situation is known to occur in plants—drastic environmental changes can convert mature somatic cells (for example, dissociated carrot cells) into immature blastema cells, from which a whole plant structure, including stalks and roots, develops in the presence of auxins. A challenging question is whether animal somatic cells have a similar potential that emerges under special conditions. Over the past decade, the presence of pluripotent cells (or closely relevant cell types) in adult tissues has been a matter of debate, for which conflicting conclusions have been reported by various groups. However, no study so far has proven that such pluripotent cells can arise from differentiated somatic cells.

# Main
Haematopoietic cells positive for CD45 (leukocyte common antigen) are typical lineage-committed somatic cells that never express pluripotency-related markers such as Oct4 unless they are reprogrammed. We therefore addressed the question of whether splenic CD45+ cells could acquire pluripotency by drastic changes in their external environment such as those caused by simple chemical perturbations.

## Low pH triggers fate conversion in somatic cells
CD45+ cells were sorted by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) from the lymphocyte fraction of postnatal spleens (1-week old) of C57BL/6 mice carrying an Oct4-gfp transgene, and were exposed to various types of strong, transient, physical and chemical stimuli (described below). We examined these cells for activation of the Oct4 promoter after culture for several days in suspension using DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) and B27 (hereafter called LIF + B27 medium). Among the various perturbations, we were particularly interested in low-pH perturbations for two reasons. First, as shown below, low-pH treatment turned out to be most effective for the induction of Oct4. Second, classical experimental embryology has shown that a transient low-pH treatment under 'sublethal' conditions can alter the differentiation status of tissues. Spontaneous neural conversion from salamander animal caps by soaking the tissues in citrate-based acidic medium below pH 6.0 has been demonstrated previously.

Without exposure to the stimuli, none of the cells sorted with CD45 expressed Oct4-GFP regardless of the culture period in LIF + B27 medium. In contrast, a 30-min treatment with low-pH medium (25-min incubation followed by 5-min centrifugation; the most effective range was pH 5.4–5.8) caused the emergence of substantial numbers of spherical clusters that expressed Oct4-GFP in day-7 culture. Substantial numbers of GFP+ cells appeared in all cases performed with neonatal splenic cells (n = 30 experiments). The emergence of Oct4-GFP+ cells at the expense of CD45+ cells was also observed by flow cytometry. We next fractionated CD45+ cells into populations positive and negative for CD90 (T cells), CD19 (B cells) and CD34 (haematopoietic progenitors), and subjected them to low-pH treatment. Cells of these fractions, including T and B cells, generated Oct4-GFP+ cells at an efficacy comparable to unfractionated CD45+ cells (25–50% of surviving cells on day 7), except for CD34+ haematopoietic progenitors, which rarely produced Oct4-GFP+ cells (< 2%).

Among maintenance media for pluripotent cells, the appearance of Oct4-GFP+ cells was most efficient in LIF + B27 medium, and did not occur in mouse epiblast-derived stem-cell (EpiSC) medium. The presence or absence of LIF during days 0–2 did not substantially affect the frequency of Oct4-GFP+ cell generation on day 7, whereas the addition of LIF during days 4–7 was not sufficient, indicating that LIF dependency started during days 2–4.

Most of the surviving cells on day 1 were still CD45+ and Oct4-GFP-. On day 3, the total cell numbers were reduced to between one-third to one-half of the day 0 population, and a substantial number of total surviving cells became Oct4-GFP+, albeit with relatively weak signal intensity. On day 7, a significant number of Oct4-GFP+ CD45- cells (one-half to two-thirds of total surviving cells) constituted a distinct population from the Oct4-GFP- CD45- cells. No obvious generation of Oct4-GFP+ CD45- populations was seen in non-treated CD45+ cells cultured similarly but without low-pH treatment.

Low-pH-treated CD45+ cells, but not untreated cells, gradually turned on GFP signals over the first few days, whereas CD45 immunoreactivity became gradually reduced in the cells that demonstrated Oct4-GFP expression. By day 5, the Oct4-GFP+ cells attached together and formed clusters by accretion. These GFP+ clusters (but not GFP- cells) were quite mobile and often showed cell processes on moving.

The Oct4-GFP+ cells demonstrated a characteristic small cell size with little cytoplasm and also showed a distinct fine structure of the nucleus compared with that of parental CD45+ lymphocytes. The Oct4-GFP+ cells on day 7 were smaller than non-treated CD45+ cells and embryonic stem (ES) cells, both of which are generally considered to be small in size. The diameter of low-pH-treated CD45+ cells became reduced during the first 2 days, even before they started Oct4-GFP expression, whereas the onset of GFP expression was not accompanied by cell divisions. Consistent with this, no substantial 5-ethynyl-2'-deoxyuridine (EdU) uptake was observed in the Oct4-GFP+ cells after the stressor.

The lack of substantial proliferation argues against the possibility that CD45- cells, contaminating as a very minor population in the FACS-sorted CD45+ cells, quickly grew and formed a substantial Oct4-GFP+ population over the first few days after the low-pH treatment. In addition, genomic rearrangements of Tcrb (T-cell receptor gene) were observed in Oct4-GFP+ cells derived from FACS-purified CD45+ cells and CD90+ CD45+ T cells, indicating at least some contribution from lineage-committed T cells. Thus, Oct4-GFP+ cells were generated de novo from low-pH-treated CD45+ haematopoietic cells by reprogramming, rather than by simple selection of stress-enduring cells.

## Low-pH-induced Oct4+ cells have pluripotency
On day 7, the Oct4-GFP+ spheres expressed pluripotency-related marker proteins (Oct4, SSEA1, Nanog and E-cadherin) and marker genes (Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, Ecat1 (also called Khdc3), Esg1 (Dppa5a), Dax1 (Nrob1) and Rex1 (Zfp42)) in a manner comparable to those seen in ES cells. Moderate levels of expression of these pluripotency marker genes were observed on day 3. Notably, the Oct4-GFP+ cells on day 3, but not on day 7, expressed early haematopoietic marker genes such as Flk1 (also called Kdr) and Tal1, indicating that Oct4-GFP+ cells on day 3, as judged by their expression pattern at the population level, were still in a dynamic process of conversion.

On day 7, unlike CD45+ cells and like ES cells, low-pH-induced Oct4-GFP+ cells displayed extensive demethylation at the Oct4 and Nanog promoter areas, indicating that these cells underwent a substantial reprogramming of epigenetic status in these key genes for pluripotency.

In vitro differentiation assays demonstrated that low-pH-induced Oct4-GFP+ cells gave rise to three-germ-layer derivatives as well as visceral endoderm-like epithelium. When grafted into mice, low-pH-induced Oct4-GFP+ cell clusters formed teratomas (40%, n = 20) but no teratocarcinomas that persistently contained Oct4-GFP+ cells (n = 50). Because some cellular variation was observed in the signal levels of Oct4-GFP within the clusters, we sorted GFP-strong cells (a major population) and GFP-dim cells (a minor population) by FACS on day 7 and separately injected them into mice. In this case, only GFP-strong cells formed teratomas. In quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) analysis, the GFP-strong population expressed pluripotency marker genes but not early lineage-specific marker genes, whereas the GFP-dim cells showed substantial expression of some early lineage-specific marker genes (Flk1, Gata2, Gata4, Pax6 and Sox17) but not Nanog and Rex1. These observations indicate that three-germ-layer derivatives were generated from the GFP-strong cells expressing pluripotency marker genes, rather than from GFP-dim cells that seem to contain partially reprogrammed cells.

Collectively, these findings show that the differentiation state of a committed somatic cell lineage can be converted into a state of pluripotency by strong stimuli given externally. Hereafter, we refer to the fate conversion from somatic cells into pluripotent cells by strong external stimuli such as low pH as 'stimulus-triggered acquisition of pluripotency' (STAP) and the resultant cells as STAP cells. Under their establishment conditions, these STAP cells were rarely proliferative. Comparative genomic hybridization array analysis of STAP cells indicated no major global changes in chromosome number.

## STAP cells compared to ES cells
STAP cells, unlike mouse ES cells, showed a limited capacity for self-renewal in the LIF-containing medium and did not efficiently form colonies in dissociation culture, even in the presence of the ROCK inhibitor Y-27632, which suppresses dissociation-induced apoptosis. Also, even under high-density culture conditions after partial dissociation, STAP cell numbers started to decline substantially after two passages. Furthermore, expression of the ES cell marker protein Esrrb was low in STAP cells. In general, female ES cells do not show X-chromosomal inactivation and contain no H3K27me3-dense foci (indicative of inactivated X chromosomes), unlike female CD45+ cells and EpiSCs. In contrast, H3K27me3-dense foci were found in ~40% of female STAP cells strongly positive for Oct4-GFP.

STAP cells were also dissimilar to mouse EpiSCs, another category of pluripotent stem cell, and were positive for Klf4 and negative for the epithelial tight junction markers claudin 7 and ZO-1.

## STAP cells from other tissue sources
We next performed similar conversion experiments with somatic cells collected from brain, skin, muscle, fat, bone marrow, lung and liver tissues of 1-week-old Oct4-gfp mice. Although conversion efficacy varied, the low-pH-triggered generation of Oct4-GFP+ cells was observed in day 7 culture of all tissues examined, including mesenchymal cells of adipose tissues and neonatal cardiac cells that were negatively sorted for CD45 by FACS.

## Chimaera formation and germline transmission in mice
We next performed a blastocyst injection assay with STAP cells that were generated from CD45+ cells of neonatal mice constitutively expressing GFP (this C57BL/6 line with cag-gfp transgenes is referred to hereafter as B6GFP). We injected STAP cell clusters en bloc that were manually cut into small pieces using a microknife. A high-to-moderate contribution of GFP-expressing cells was seen in the chimaeric embryos. These chimaeric mice were born at a substantial rate and all developed normally.

CD45+ cell-derived STAP cells contributed to all tissues examined. Furthermore, offspring derived from STAP cells were born to the chimaeric mice, demonstrating their germline transmission, which is a strict criterion for pluripotency as well as genetic and epigenetic normality. Furthermore, in a tetraploid (4N) complementation assay, which is considered to be the most rigorous test for developmental potency, CD45+ cell-derived STAP cells (from F1 mice of B6GFP x 129/Sv or DBA/2) generated all-GFP+ embryos on embryonic day (E)10.5, demonstrating that STAP cells alone are sufficient to construct an entire embryonic structure. Thus, STAP cells have the developmental capacity to differentiate into all somatic-cell lineages as well as germ-cell lineages in vivo.

## Expandable pluripotent cell lines from STAP cells
STAP cells have a limited self-renewal capacity under the conditions used for establishment. However, in the context of the embryonic environment, a small fragment of a STAP cell cluster could grow even into a whole embryo. With this in mind, we next examined whether STAP cells have the potential to generate expandable pluripotent cell lines in vitro under certain conditions.

STAP cells could not be efficiently maintained for additional passages in conventional LIF + FBS-containing medium or 2i medium (most STAP cells died in 2i medium within 7 days). Notably, an adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) + LIF-containing medium (hereafter called ACTH medium) known to facilitate clonal expansion of ES cells supported outgrowth of STAP cell colonies. When cultured in this medium on a MEF feeder or gelatin, a portion of STAP cell clusters started to grow (such outgrowth was typically found in 10-20% of wells in single cluster culture using 96-well plates and in > 75% when 12 clusters were plated per well). These growing colonies looked similar to those of mouse ES cells and expressed a high level of Oct4-GFP.

After culturing in ACTH medium for 7 days, this growing population of cells, unlike parental STAP cells, could be passaged as single cells, grow in 2i medium and expand exponentially, up to at least 120 days of culture (no substantial chromosomal abnormality was seen). Hereafter, we refer to the proliferative cells derived from STAP cells as STAP stem cells.

STAP stem cells expressed protein and RNA markers for pluripotent cells, showed low DNA methylation levels at the Oct4 and Nanog loci, and had a nuclear fine structure similar to that of ES cells (few electron-dense areas corresponding to heterochromatin). In differentiation culture, STAP stem cells generated ectodermal, mesodermal and endodermal derivatives in vitro, including beating cardiac muscles, and formed teratomas in vivo. After blastocyst injection, STAP stem cells efficiently contributed to chimaeric mice, in which germline transmission was seen. Even in tetraploid complementation assays, injected STAP stem cells could generate mice capable of growing to adults and producing offspring (in all eight independent lines).

In addition to their expandability, we noticed at least two other differences between STAP stem cells and parental STAP cells. First, the expression of the ES cell marker protein Esrrb, which was undetectable in STAP cells, was clearly seen in STAP stem cells. Second, the presence of H3K27me3 foci, which was found in a substantial proportion of female STAP cells, was no longer observed in STAP stem cells. Thus, STAP cells have the potential to give rise to expandable cell lines that exhibit features similar to those of ES cells.

# Discussion
This study has revealed that somatic cells latently possess a surprising plasticity. This dynamic plasticity—the ability to become pluripotent cells—emerges when cells are transiently exposed to strong stimuli that they would not normally experience in their living environments.

Low-pH treatment was also used in the 'autoneuralization' experiment by Holtfreter in 1947, in which exposure to acidic medium caused tissue-autonomous neural conversion of salamander animal caps in vitro in the absence of Spemann's organizer signals. Although the mechanism has remained elusive, Holtfreter hypothesized that the strong stimulus releases the animal cap cells from some intrinsic inhibitory mechanisms that suppress fate conversion or, in his words, they pass through 'sublethal cytolysis' (meaning stimulus-evoked lysis of the cell's inhibitory state). Although Holtfreter's study and ours differ in the direction of fate conversion—orthograde differentiation and nuclear reprogramming, respectively—these phenomena may share some common aspects, particularly with regard to sublethal stimulus-evoked release from a static (conversion-resisting) state in the cell.

A remaining question is whether cellular reprogramming is initiated specifically by the low-pH treatment or also by some other types of sublethal stress such as physical damage, plasma membrane perforation, osmotic pressure shock, growth-factor deprivation, heat shock or high Ca2+ exposure. At least some of these stressors, particularly physical damage by rigorous trituration and membrane perforation by streptolysin O, induced the generation of Oct4-GFP+ cells from CD45+ cells. These findings raise the possibility that certain common regulatory modules, lying downstream of these distantly related sublethal stresses, act as a key for releasing somatic cells from the tightly locked epigenetic state of differentiation, leading to a global change in epigenetic regulation. In other words, unknown cellular functions, activated by sublethal stimuli, may set somatic cells free from their current commitment to recover the naive cell state.

Our present finding of an unexpectedly large capacity for radical reprogramming in committed somatic cells raises various important questions. For instance, why, and for what purpose, do somatic cells latently possess this self-driven ability for nuclear reprogramming, which emerges only after sublethal stimulation, and how, then, is this reprogramming mechanism normally suppressed? Furthermore, why isn't teratoma (or pluripotent cell mass) formation normally seen in in vivo tissues that may receive strong environmental stress? In our preliminary study, experimental reflux oesophagitis locally induced moderate expression of Oct4-GFP but not endogenous Nanog in the mouse oesophageal mucosa. Therefore, an intriguing hypothesis for future research is that the progression from initial Oct4 activation to further reprogramming is suppressed by certain inhibitory mechanisms in vivo.

The question of why and how this self-driven reprogramming is directed towards the pluripotent state is fundamentally important, given that STAP reprogramming takes a remarkably short period, only a few days for substantial expression of pluripotency marker genes, unlike transgene- or chemical-induced iPS cell conversion. Thus, our results cast new light on the biological meaning of diverse cellular states in multicellular organisms.

# Methods
## Tissue collection and low-pH exposure
To isolate haematopoietic cells, spleens were excised from 1-week-old Oct4-gfp C57BL/6 mice, minced by scissors and mechanically dissociated with pasture pipettes. Dissociated cells were collected, re-suspended in DMEM medium and added to the same volume of lympholyte (Cedarlane), then centrifuged at 1,000 g for 20 min. CD45-positive cells were sorted by FACS Aria, and treated with low-pH HBSS solution (pH 5.7 for 25 min at 37 °C), centrifuged for 5 min to remove supernatant, and plated to non-adhesive culture plates in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 1,000 U LIF and B27. Although Oct4-GFP+ cells (expressing pluripotency-related protein and gene markers and capable of differentiating into three germ-layer derivatives) were also generated from lymphocytes of young adult mice (for example, 6-week-old) under the same culture conditions, their proportion in culture was reduced by several to ten folds as compared to neonatal lymphocytes when lymphocytes were isolated from 1-month-old mice or older. Live imaging was performed using specially assembled confocal microscope systems with a CO2 incubator, and CD45 immunoreactivity in live cells was examined as described.

## In vivo and in vitro differentiation assay
STAP cells were seeded onto a sheet 3 x 3 x 1 mm, composed of a non-woven mesh of polyglycolic acid fibres and implanted subcutaneously into the dorsal flanks of 4-week-old NOD/SCID mice. To examine in vitro differentiation, STAP cells and STAP stem cells were collected at 7 days and subjected to SDIA or SFEBq culture for neural differentiation and to embryoid body culture for mesodermal and endodermal differentiation.

## Animal studies
Research involving animals complied with protocols approved by the Harvard Medical School/Brigham and Women's Hospital Committee on Animal Care, and the Institutional Committee of Laboratory Animal Experimentation of the RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology.

## Chimaeric mouse generation and analyses
For production of diploid and tetraploid chimaeras with STAP cells, diploid embryos were obtained from ICR strain females. Tetraploid embryos were produced by electrofusion of 2-cell embryos. Because trypsin treatment of donor samples turned out to cause low chimaerism, STAP spherical colonies were cut into small pieces using a microknife under the microscope, and small clusters of STAP cells were then injected into day-4.5 blastocysts by a large pipette. The next day, the chimaeric blastocysts were transferred into day-2.5 pseudopregnant females. For experiments using STAP cells from CD45+ cells without the Oct4-gfp reporter, STAP cell clusters were identified by their characteristic cluster morphology. For an estimate of the contribution of these injected cells, we used STAP cells that were generated from CD45+ cells of mice constitutively expressing GFP (C57BL/6 line with cag-gfp transgenes; F1 of C57BL/6 and 129/Sv or DBA/2 was used from the viewpoint of heterosis).

## STAP stem-cell conversion culture
For establishment of STAP stem-cell lines, STAP cell clusters were transferred to ACTH-containing medium on MEF feeder cells (several clusters, up to a dozen clusters, per well of 96-well plates). Four to seven days later, the cells were subjected to the first passage using a conventional trypsin method, and suspended cells were plated in ES maintain medium containing 20% FBS. Subsequent passaging was performed at a split ratio of 1:10 every second day before they reached subconfluency.

## Bisulphite sequencing
GFP-positive cells in STAP clusters were collected by FACS Aria. Genomic DNA was extracted from STAP cells and analysed. Bisulphite treatment of DNA was performed using the CpGenome DNA modification kit, following the manufacturer's instructions. The resulting modified DNA was amplified by nested PCR using two forward (F) primers and one reverse (R) primer for Oct4 and Nanog.

## Immunohistochemistry
Cultured cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100/PBS before blocking with 1% BSA solution. Cells were incubated with primary antibodies including anti-Oct4, anti-Nanog, anti-SSEA-1, anti-E-cadherin, anti-ZO-1, anti-claudin7, anti-Klf4, anti-Esrrb, anti-H3K27me3, anti-BrdU and anti-Ki67. Cell nuclei were visualized with DAPI.

## RNA-sequencing and ChIP sequencing analyses
For RNA sequencing of cell lines, total RNA was extracted from cells by the RNasy mini kit. RNA-seq libraries were prepared from 1 µg total RNAs following the protocol of the TruSeq RNA Sample Prep kit and subjected to deep sequencing analysis with Illumina Hi-Seq1500. ChIP-seq libraries were prepared from 20 ng input DNAs, 1 ng H3K4me3 ChIP DNAs, or 5 ng H3K27me3 ChIP DNAs using the KAPA Library Preparation kit.
