# Abstract
We mutated, by gene targeting, the endogenous hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT) gene in mouse embryo-derived stem (ES) cells. A specialized construct of the neomycin resistance (neo) gene was introduced into an exon of a cloned fragment of the Hprt gene and used to transfect ES cells. Among the G418-resistant colonies, 1/1000 were also resistant to the base analog 6-thioguanine (6-TG). The G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cells were all shown to be Hprt-deficient as the result of homologous recombination with the exogenous, neo-containing, Hprt sequences. We have compared the gene-targeting efficiencies of two classes of neo-Hprt recombinant vectors: those that replace the endogenous sequence with the exogenous sequence and those that insert the exogenous sequence into the endogenous sequence. The targeting efficiencies of both classes of vectors are strongly dependent upon the extent of homology between exogenous and endogenous sequences. The protocol described herein should be useful for targeting mutations into any gene.

# Introduction
Gene targeting—the homologous recombination of DNA sequences residing in the chromosome with newly introduced DNA sequences—provides a means for systematically altering the mammalian genome. A desired alteration would first be introduced into a cloned DNA sequence, and gene targeting would then transfer the alteration into the genome. Gene targeting should be equally effective for correcting or mutating the desired chromosomal locus.

We initiated our analysis of gene targeting in cultured mammalian cells by studying recombination between a defective gene residing in the chromosome and newly introduced plasmid DNA carrying a different mutation in the same gene. For those experiments, we first established cell lines containing a mutant neomycin resistance (neo) gene integrated into the genome of mouse L cells. We were then able to restore the gene via homologous recombination by injecting DNA carrying a different mutation in the neo gene. In the course of these experiments we uncovered two mechanisms for altering chromosomal sequences. The first involved the transfer of information, by homologous recombination, from the newly introduced DNA into the cognate chromosomal sequence. The second involved inducing mutations in the homologous chromosomal sequence by what appears to entail incorrect repair of a heteroduplex formed between the newly introduced DNA and the cognate chromosomal sequence. Each of the two methods has its own advantages. The transfer of information by homologous recombination allows one to mutate or correct the desired chromosomal locus in a defined manner. On the other hand, the frequency of altering chromosomal sequences by heteroduplex-induced mutagenesis promises to be higher than via homologous recombination. This could prove to be a useful method for generating a large number of random mutations in specific genes.

In this current study we have extended our analysis of gene targeting by using an endogenous gene as the target and by using embryo-derived stem (ES) cells as the recipient cell line. The target gene is hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT). This gene was selected primarily for two reasons. First, the Hprt gene lies on the X-chromosome. Since ES cells derived from male embryos are hemizygous for Hprt, only a single copy of the Hprt gene needs to be inactivated in order to yield a selectable phenotype. Second, selection procedures have been developed for isolating Hprt-deficient mutants. By far the most common pathway for cells in culture to become resistant to the base analog 6-thioguanine (6-TG) is to acquire a mutation in the Hprt gene.

ES cells were chosen for these experiments because, following inactivation of a chosen gene by gene targeting, they should provide the means to generate mice with the desired mutation. ES cells have been shown to be pluripotent in vitro and in vivo. When reintroduced into mouse blastocysts, these cells contribute efficiently to the formation of chimeras, including contributions to a functional germ line. In addition, it has been shown recently that these cells can be manipulated in vitro without losing their capacity to generate germ-line chimeras. Following transfection with the neo gene and selection for G418-resistance, these ES cells were used to produce germ-line chimeras that stably transmitted G418-resistance to subsequent generations. HPRT-deficient mice were produced from ES cells that were either selected for spontaneous Hprt mutations or selected for Hprt-deficiency following the random insertion of retroviral DNA into the mouse genome.

Here we describe the site-directed inactivation of the endogenous Hprt gene in male ES cells by gene targeting. We examine some parameters that affect the gene-targeting frequency as well as the mechanism of gene inactivation mediated by different recombinant vectors. Under optimal conditions, we find that 1/1000 cells transformed by exogenous DNA can undergo a gene-targeting event. The advantage of inactivating specific genes via gene targeting compared with random mutagenic methods such as chemical mutagenesis or retroviral DNA insertion is twofold. First, the nature of the mutant allele is at the discretion of the experimenter, and second, unlike random mutagenic events, the frequency of the targeting events is sufficiently high to make the procedure applicable to nonselectable genes.

# Main
The Hprt gene encompasses over 33 kb of DNA and contains 9 exons that encode 1307 nucleotides of mRNA. Our strategies for inactivating the Hprt gene involve disrupting the eighth exon in a cloned fragment of Hprt by inserting the neo gene. Following introduction of this DNA into ES cells, homologous recombination transfers this disruption into the endogenous Hprt gene, rendering the cells neo-resistant and Hprt-deficient, and therefore resistant to the drug G418 and the base analog 6-TG.

Using gene targeting in yeast as a paradigm, we constructed two classes of vectors that we believed would disrupt the Hprt gene either by replacing endogenous sequences or by inserting into the endogenous sequences. We termed these recombinant neo-Hprt vectors replacement vectors (RV) and insertion vectors (IV). It was of interest to determine whether one or the other class of vectors was more efficient at targeting. Furthermore, since the end results using these two classes of vectors were predicted to be different, each could be used to generate different mutant alleles.

## Reengineering the neo Gene
In the schemes outlined for site-specific mutagenesis of the Hprt gene, the neo gene is used both to disrupt the coding sequence of the target gene and as a tag to monitor the integration of the newly introduced DNA into the recipient genome. Effective use of the neo gene as a tag requires expression of the gene in the Hprt locus. In general, if the neo gene is to be used in a similar fashion to inactivate other genes, it must be expressed in as many chromosomal sites as possible.

In one of our mutagenesis schemes, we require the newly added neo-containing sequences to convert the endogenous gene. We suspect that the frequency of gene conversion at the target locus may be inversely proportional to the length of nonhomology in the converting sequence. This certainly appears to be the case for intrachromosomal gene conversion.

Keeping the above points in mind, we have redesigned the neo gene to optimize expression in ES cells while maintaining its size at a minimum. It is designated pMC1Neo. The neomycin protein coding sequence is from the bacterial transposon Tn5. The promoter that drives the neo gene is derived from the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene (HSV-tk). This promoter appears to be effective in embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells. To increase the efficiency of the tk promoter, we introduced a duplication of a synthetic 85 bp fragment derived from the PyF441 polyoma virus enhancer. This fragment encompasses the DNA sequence change that allows the polyoma mutant to productively infect EC cells. Finally, because the native neo gene translation initiation signal is particularly unfavorable for mammalian translation, a synthetic sequence was substituted using Kozak's rules as a guide. A series of transfection experiments demonstrated that pMC1Neo, inserted into the eighth exon of Hprt, could utilize the Hprt poly(A) addition signal. This obviated the need to include a poly(A) addition signal in the construction.

Each of the above modifications was found to contribute additively to the transfection efficiency. The contribution of each change was assessed by introducing the different neo constructs into mouse fibroblasts (L cells) and mouse ES cells either by microinjection or by electroporation and assaying for the yield of G418-resistant colonies.

Parallel experiments compared the transfection efficiency of three neo vectors, pRSVNeo, pSV2Neo, and pMC1Neo, in ES cells. The DNA was introduced by electroporation. pRSVNeo contains the neo gene driven by the long terminal repeat from the avian Rous sarcoma virus. This promoter, with its accompanying enhancer, functions very efficiently in mouse fibroblasts but functions poorly in ES cells. pSV2Neo is an SV40 promoter-enhancer-based vector that appears to function moderately well in ES cells. It is apparent that pMC1Neo not only yields more G418-resistant colonies than either pRSVNeo or pSV2Neo, but also that the colonies are larger. In mouse fibroblasts, all three vectors yield G418-resistant colonies at comparable efficiencies.

Quantitative comparison of the transfection efficiencies shows that pMC1Neo yields 300- to 800-fold and 25- to 50-fold more G418-resistant colonies than pRSVNeo or pSV2Neo, respectively. One interpretation of these results is that, since these vectors are inserting randomly into the mouse genome, the transfection efficiencies reflect the relative number of integration sites within the genome that are compatible with sufficient neo gene expression to yield G418-resistant colonies. The higher transfection efficiency of pMC1Neo may prove critical when attempting to use neo as a tag for targeting into genes that are either expressed at low levels, such as Hprt, or not at all. We have never observed G418-resistant colonies following mock transfections of ES cells.

## Electroporation
We have used electroporation to introduce the neo-Hprt recombinant vectors into ES cells. Under our optimal transfection conditions, 40%-80% of the cells survived electroporation and approximately 1/1000 surviving ES cells became G418-resistant. The conditions for electroporation were further chosen to yield predominantly single copy integrants. Of a dozen G418-resistant cell lines analyzed by Southern transfer, each contained a single copy of pMC1Neo integrated in the mouse genome.

## Recombinant Vectors
The vectors used to inactivate the Hprt gene contain sequences from the 3' portion of the mouse Hprt gene cloned into a pUC9 plasmid. In all vectors, the 1 kb neo cassette from pMC1Neo has been inserted into the eighth exon of the Hprt gene. To minimize the extent of nonhomology between the endogenous Hprt gene and the newly introduced DNA, sequences required for growth of the recombinant vector in bacteria were removed prior to introduction into ES cells. In the process of removing these sequences, the recombinant vector is converted to linear DNA that, compared with supercoiled DNA, is a better substrate for gene targeting. As discussed previously, these vectors fall into two classes, sequence replacement vectors and sequence insertion vectors, based on the predicted mode of targeting.

Sequence replacement vectors were designed such that upon linearization, the vector Hprt sequences would remain colinear with the endogenous Hprt sequences. In other words, the 5' and 3' ends of the vector would correspond to the 5' and 3' extents of sequence homology with the endogenous gene. Three different sequence replacement vectors were used in this study. All of them contain a common 3' endpoint, 2.8 kb downstream from the site of the neo gene insertion, but differ in the length of Hprt sequences 5' from the insertion. The total length of Hprt homology in vectors pRV4.0, pRV5.4, and pRV9.1 is 4.0, 5.4, and 9.1 kb, respectively.

The alternate class of vectors, the sequence insertion vectors, were designed such that the separation of the Hprt vector from the pUC9 plasmids concomitantly creates a double strand break within the Hprt sequences. The 5' and 3' ends of these vectors thus lie adjacent to one another along the Hprt map. Two sequence insertion vectors were used in these experiments, pIV3.7 and pIV9.3. The endpoints of both linearized vectors arise from the BstEII site 1.1 kb upstream from the site of the neo insertion in exon 8. Both vectors contain the same 1.2 kb of Hprt sequences 3' from the neo insertion, but differ in the length of homology at the 5' side of the neo insertion.

## Targeting with Sequence Replacement Vectors
DNAs from the three sequence replacement vectors were linearized and introduced into ES cells by electroporation. Aliquots of these cells were subjected to one of three growth conditions: nonselective media, to assess the total number of cells surviving electroporation; G418 media, to assay the fraction of survivors transformed by the neo-containing vectors; and G418, 6-TG media, to select for cells simultaneously containing the neo gene but lacking a functional Hprt gene. In cells showing the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant phenotype, the endogenous Hprt gene was inactivated by the targeted replacement of the endogenous sequence with the neo-recombinant sequence.

The three different sequence replacement vectors were able to confer G418-resistant and G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant phenotypes upon ES cells. Although the three vectors transform ES cells to G418-resistant at a similar frequency, there is a marked difference in their ability to generate G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant colonies. Of the G418-resistant cells transformed with the smallest vector, pRV4.0, only 1/40,000 to 1/21,500 showed resistance to 6-TG. However, in those cells transformed to G418-resistant by the largest vector, pRV9.1, 1/950 also showed the 6-TG-resistant phenotype. Transformation by the intermediate-sized vector, pRV5.4, gave an intermediate frequency of 6-TG resistance, with 1/8,900 G418-resistant colonies showing the 6-TG-resistant phenotype.

To show that the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant phenotypes were the result of gene-targeting events, the Hprt genes from 23 independently isolated G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell lines were characterized by Southern transfer analysis. In every instance the cells were shown to contain a single copy of the Hprt gene harboring the neo gene in exon 8. This result was seen in cells transformed with either pRV4.0, pRV5.4, or pRV9.1. Also, as expected, HPRT enzymatic activity could not be detected in these cell lines. As judged by their ability to incorporate [3H]hypoxanthine into their nucleic acid, these cells contained 10^3- to 10^4-fold less activity than the parental ES cell line.

Southern transfer analysis characterized the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell line EP17-2M in comparison with the parental ES cell line. DNA from each line was digested with the enzymes, BglII, EcoRI, or BglII plus EcoRI, electrophoresed in agarose, and transferred to nitrocellulose paper. Digestion of the ES DNA with BglII, EcoRI, or BglII plus EcoRI isolates sequences homologous to the Hprt probe on fragments of lengths 5.4 kb, 9.3 kb, or 3.7 kb, respectively. The digestion pattern of the DNA from the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell line is quite different, showing fragments of 6.4 kb, 8.3 kb, and 2.7 kb. This pattern would exist if the endogenous Hprt gene had been replaced by vector sequences containing the neo gene insertion. Because the neo gene insert has no BglII site, the size of the BglII fragment is increased by the size of the insert (1 kb). However, because the neo gene does contain an EcoRI site, its presence introduces a new EcoRI site into the Hprt gene, resulting in the production of a smaller EcoRI fragment.

The interpretation is further verified when the same DNAs are hybridized to sequences from the neo gene. As expected, the parental cell line contains no neo homology. The G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant derivative does show neo homology at a site within the Hprt locus. Digestion of the DNA with BglII isolates the neo gene on the same 6.4 kb fragment homologous to the Hprt probe. Because the neo gene contains an EcoRI site at its 5' end, digestion with this enzyme separates the neo gene from sequences homologous to the Hprt probe and thus creates a 2 kb fragment with neo homology.

It should be noted that the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell line EP17-2M was isolated following transformation with pRV4.0. Although this vector lacks both the EcoRI and the BglII sites 5' to the neo insertion site, the cell line EP17-2M clearly has both sites at the predicted distance from the neo gene. Such a positioning of two restriction sites is best explained by a targeted recombination event.

## Gene Targeting with Sequence Insertion Vectors
The two sequence insertion vectors were linearized and introduced into ES cells by electroporation. These cells were then scored for total survivors, G418-resistant survivors, and G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant survivors. The two vectors were equally competent in the ability to confer G418-resistance upon ES cells, but differed markedly in their ability to generate G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant colonies. Whereas the smaller vector, pIV3.7, generates 6-TG-resistant cells at a frequency of 1/19,000 G418-resistant cells, the larger, pIV9.3, induces 6-TG-resistance at a frequency of 1/1,100 to 1/1,400 G418-resistant cells. In all cases, the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cells contained targeted mutations of their Hprt loci.

To show that gene targeting was responsible for generating the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant phenotype, we analyzed by Southern transfer analysis 12 cell lines transformed by pIV9.3. Unlike the case of the sequence replacement vectors in which all Hprt mutations were caused by the same type of event, inactivation of the Hprt gene by sequence insertion vectors occurred by two mechanisms. The majority of targeting events caused by pIV9.3 (9/12) were due to the insertion of the entire vector into the endogenous Hprt locus. The remaining targeting events were sequence replacements, resembling those events induced by the sequence replacement vectors.

Southern transfer analysis of cell line EP18-1F, a G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell line transformed with pIV9.3, was performed. DNA from this cell line and DNA from the parental ES line were digested with BglII, EcoRI, or BglII plus EcoRI and probed with labeled Hprt sequences. DNA from the parental cell line shows the 5.4, 9.3, and 3.7 kb fragments diagnostic of the wild-type Hprt gene. DNA from the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell line contains these same fragments, but also contains fragments of 6.4, 8.3, and 2.7 kb. These later fragments are characteristic of the Hprt gene containing the neo gene in exon 8. If the entire vector, pIV9.3, is inserted into the Hprt locus via homologous recombination, it will cause a 9.3 kb duplication of the Hprt sequences. The most 5' duplicated region will contain the neo gene, whereas the most 3' duplicated region will contain wild-type sequences. Restriction enzyme digestions of this DNA will thus produce the hybrid configuration seen. This interpretation is further confirmed when the DNA from such a cell line is also probed with neo sequences. Only one copy of the duplicated region contains neo homology.

In 3/12 cell lines examined by Southern transfer analysis, this insertion pattern was not seen. Instead, the endogenous Hprt sequences appeared to have been replaced by the vector sequences containing the neo insert. An example of one such cell line, EP18-2N, transformed by pIV9.3, showed a restriction pattern indistinguishable from that generated by digestion of DNA from cell line EP17-2M, a cell line transformed by a sequence replacement vector. Thus, sequence insertion vectors are also substrates for the sequence replacement reaction.

In examining the DNA products of the sequence replacement reactions, a low level of Hprt sequences lacking the neo sequences is detected. These endogenous-length Hprt sequences come from the feeder cells upon which the ES cells are grown. The feeder cells are nonproliferating due to pretreatment with mitomycin C and represent a minor component of the total number of cells on the plate. However, the presence of such contaminating Hprt sequences presents a problem in our analysis of the sequence insertion events. In these latter events, the neo-containing vector sequences lie adjacent to the endogenous sequences, and hybridization analysis revealed the presence of these two Hprt sequences in equal proportions. We demonstrated that the endogenous-length Hprt copy detected in this Southern transfer was in fact adjacent to the inserted copy and not the result of feeder cell contamination.

To do this, DNA was digested with the restriction endonuclease HindIII and probed with Hprt sequence. Such a digestion permits a distinction to be made between a single copy endogenous sequence and a sequence adjacent to the inserted vector. The endogenous Hprt sequences, represented by the parental ES cell line, are contained on an 11.4 kb fragment. Sequences containing a single copy of the Hprt gene disrupted by the neo gene, from cell line EP17-2M, are isolated on a 12.4 kb band. Digestion of DNA from the cell line EP18-1F, transformed by a sequence insertion vector, gives two Hprt fragments of equal intensity, one of 12.4 kb and one of 9.3 kb. This digestion pattern is consistent with a sequence insertion event.

# Discussion
We have analyzed 38 independent G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant ES cell lines. Each of these cell lines was shown to have arisen from inactivation of the endogenous Hprt gene by homologous recombination with the introduced neo-Hprt fragment. Spontaneous formation of G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cells was not detected (i.e., occurs at less than 1/10^9 cells per generation).

None of the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell lines contained extraneous copies of the neo-Hprt recombinant vector integrated randomly within the ES genome. This greatly simplified the analysis of the targeting events in these cell lines and permitted an unambiguous interpretation of the results. The absence of extraneous copies of the input vector in the targeted cells should also simplify interpretation of additional studies that will entail establishing a correlation between the inactivation of specific genes with the resultant phenotypes.

Under our optimal conditions, we have observed a gene-targeting frequency, relative to the frequency of random integration of the input vector, of 1/1000. The parameters that we believe influenced the success of these experiments include using a neo gene that is efficiently expressed in ES cells, maintaining the size of the neo gene at a minimum, using extensive homology between the homing sequence and the target sequence, and removing, prior to transfection, unnecessary and nonhomologous sequences from the input vector.

This gene-targeting frequency is sufficiently high to be used for inactivating nonselectable genes. Direct screening, by Southern transfer analysis, for a gene-targeting event among 1000 candidate cell lines would not be exorbitant. Furthermore, gene-targeting enrichment procedures could be added to the protocol for using the neo gene as a transfection tag. For example, a neo gene lacking an enhancer or a poly(A) addition signal could be positioned within the homing sequence in such a way that homologous recombination with the target gene would juxtapose the defective neo gene with the sequences required for effective expression. Random integration of the same vector into the recipient genome would not normally bring the required sequence sufficiently near the neo gene to yield G418-resistant colonies. Pilot experiments testing such procedures indicate that enrichment of several hundred fold for gene targeting compared with random integration should be attainable.

The gene-targeting frequency was observed to be very sensitive to the extent of homology between the exogenous and cognate endogenous sequence. A two-fold increase in homology increased the gene-targeting frequency by 20-fold. Further increases in the extent of homology may increase the gene-targeting frequency even more.

We have compared two classes of neo-Hprt recombinant vectors, one that replaces endogenous sequences with exogenous sequences and another that inserts exogenous sequences into the endogenous sequence. Both classes exhibit comparable gene-targeting frequencies and are equally sensitive to the extent of homology with the endogenous target. We have termed the former sequence replacement vectors and the latter sequence insertion vectors. In 23/23 G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell lines obtained by introducing the replacement vector, the endogenous Hprt gene was inactivated by sequence replacement. Of the 12 G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell lines obtained with the insertion vector pIV9.3, 9 resulted from sequence insertion. In the remaining 3 the Hprt gene was inactivated by sequence replacement. The latter may result from a crossover occurring at points within the vector sequences rather than at both termini. Though insertion vectors mediate mutagenesis via two pathways, they target predominantly by inserting into the endogenous gene.

The insertion vectors are technically more difficult to build. On the other hand, they may provide the means for generating a wider spectrum of mutant alleles. For example, by placing the neo gene in the 3'-untranslated sequence, it can still be used as a transfection tag. In such a vector, the neo gene could be linked to a wide spectrum of mutations, including point mutations, small insertions, or small deletions, in upstream exons. In the process of insertion of the neo vector, these mutations would be concomitantly transferred into the endogenous gene.

When we initiated these experiments we had two concerns about using the Hprt gene as our target: it is expressed at a low level in ES cells, and it contains many repetitive DNA sequences. As in most cells, HPRT protein represents approximately 1/5,000 of the soluble protein. Furthermore, repetitive DNA sequences are dispersed throughout both the neo-Hprt recombinant vector and the Hprt gene. In fact, it is not a simple task to identify a suitable probe from the Hprt locus for Southern transfer analysis. The success obtained in targeting to the Hprt gene despite these handicaps may indicate that in the future we need not be so concerned with these parameters negatively influencing the gene-targeting frequency.

## Conclusion
We have demonstrated that we can inactivate by gene targeting a specific locus in the mouse genome. The protocol we have developed to inactivate the endogenous Hprt gene should be adaptable to other genes as well. We have also shown that ES cells are a suitable host for gene-targeting experiments. It is hoped that this combination of using ES cells as the recipient cell line and site-specific mutagenesis achieved by gene targeting will provide the means for generating mice of any desired genotype. An advantage of this scenario is that the first generation chimera will usually be heterozygous for the targeted mutation and that subsequent breeding can be used to generate the homozygous animal. Thus, only one of the two loci need be inactivated, and recessive lethals can be maintained as heterozygotes. If successful, this technology will be used in the future to dissect the developmental pathway of the mouse as well as to generate mouse models for human genetic diseases.

# Methods

## Vector Construction
Hprt sequences were isolated from a Charon 4A library containing a partial EcoRI-digest of DNA from a mouse A/J cell line. The library was screened with a human cDNA Hprt probe. A recombinant phage containing the 9.3 EcoRI fragment encoding Hprt exons 6-9, as well as the 2.2 and 1.0 kb fragments 3' of the Hprt gene, was isolated. The 9.3 kb and 2.2 kb fragments were subcloned into pUC9 and converted by standard cloning methods into the targeting vectors. To introduce the neo gene into Hprt exon 8, an 8 bp XhoI linker was ligated into the ScaI site in exon 8.

The neo vector pMC1Neo was created by the sequential ligation of its four functional domains into pUC9. The polyoma enhancer sequences were chemically synthesized on an Applied Biosystems model 380B DNA synthesizer and were flanked with XhoI (5' end) and SalI (3' end) restriction sites. To create the enhancer dimer used in pMC1Neo, the monomer units were ligated in vitro and the dimer was purified from a polyacrylamide gel. The HSV-tk promoter sequence from bases 92 to 121 was chemically synthesized and ligated in vitro to bases 122-218, isolated as an EcoRI-PstI fragment from the HSV-tk gene. The translational start sequence was synthesized chemically. The neo gene was derived from the transposon Tn5. The structure of pMC1Neo was confirmed by DNA sequence analysis. pMC1Neo was designed such that the neo gene and all its control elements could be removed as a 1 kb unit following digestion by XhoI and SalI and thus inserted into the XhoI site in the Hprt gene of the various targeting vectors.

Southern transfer analysis was performed as described previously.

## Isolation and Culturing of ES Cells
ES cells were isolated from C57BL/6 blastocysts as described by Evans and Kaufman except that primary embryonic fibroblasts were used as feeders rather than STO cells. Briefly, 2.5 days postpregnancy mice were ovariectomized, and delayed blastocysts were recovered 4-8 days later. The blastocysts were cultured on mitomycin C-inactivated primary embryonic fibroblasts. After blastocyst attachment and the outgrowth of the trophectoderm, the ICM-derived clump was picked and dispersed by trypsin into clumps of 3-4 cells and put onto new feeders. All culturing was carried out in DMEM plus 20% FCS and 10^-4 M beta-mercaptoethanol. The cultures were examined daily. After 6-7 days in culture, colonies that still resembled ES cells were picked, dispersed into single cells, and replated on feeders. Those cell lines that retained the morphology and growth characteristic of ES cells were tested for pluripotency in vitro. These cell lines were maintained on feeders and transferred every 2-3 days. For comparative purposes we have also used ES cell lines kindly provided by Martin Evans and Gail Martin. Cell lines from all three sources yielded targeted G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant colonies at comparable frequencies. The G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell lines are morphologically indistinguishable from the parental ES cells and retained their pluripotency in vitro.

## Electroporation and Isolation of G418-resistant and G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant Cell Lines
DNA was introduced into the ES cells by electroporation using the Promega Biotech X Cell 2000. Rapidly growing cells were trypsinized, washed in DMEM, counted, and resuspended in buffer containing 20 mM HEPES (pH 7.0), 0.37 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 0.7 mM Na2HPO4, 6 mM dextrose, and 0.1 mM beta-mercaptoethanol. Just prior to electroporation, the linearized recombinant vector was added. The cells were then exposed to a single, 625 V/cm pulse at room temperature, allowed to remain in the buffer for 10 min, and plated onto feeder cells. For every experiment, aliquots of cells were removed before and after electroporation to measure colony-forming units; 40%-60% of the cells survived electroporation.

In a typical experiment 10^7 cells per vial were transfected by electroporation with 25 ug/ml of linearized vector. Aliquots of cells were then subjected to one of three growth conditions: nonselective media, to evaluate the number of cells surviving electroporation; G418 media, to determine the fraction of survivors transformed by the neo vector; and G418, 6-TG media, to select cells that had simultaneously acquired a neo gene and lost a functional Hprt gene. For these experiments the ES cells were grown on mitomycin C-inactivated STO cells. To ensure inactivation, the STO cells were treated with 10 ug/ml mitomycin C for 4 hr. Survival was less than 1/10^8 cells.

ES cells that were to be grown on nonselective medium were diluted 4 x 10^4-fold and 6 x 10^4-fold prior to plating onto 100 mm dishes containing the feeder cells. Cells that were to be subjected to growth on G418 medium or G418, 6-TG medium were diluted 200-fold and 25-fold, respectively, before plating onto feeders. To allow for expression of the neo gene, the cells were first plated in nonselective medium and, 48 hr later, were transferred to G418-containing medium (250 ug/ml). To allow for the decay of the endogenous HPRT activity, the cells that would eventually be subjected to G418, 6-TG selection were first plated in nonselective medium. Two days later they were transferred to G418 medium, and 5 days after electroporation they were transferred to G418, 6-TG (1 ug/ml) medium.

At each transfer, the cells were trypsinized and placed on a new feeder plate in their respective medium. It is necessary to disperse the cells prior to subjecting them to selection because ES cells grow in tight clumps and cross-feed extensively. During this period of selection, the cells are dividing and it is necessary, for quantitative analysis, to keep track of the number of cell divisions. For this purpose, aliquots of cells from the same experiment were grown in nonselective medium, subjected to the same transfer protocol, and used to measure cell proliferation during this period. An outcome of the above protocol is that if a single targeting event occurs during the time of electroporation, one of the G418, 6-TG plates will yield a burst of 32-64 G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant colonies; the rest of the plates will contain no colonies. This is scored as a single event. Each of the G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant cell lines that we obtained came from such individual bursts, indicating that the targeting events occurred at the time of electroporation. The above scoring procedure underestimates the gene-targeting frequency since a burst of G418-resistant, 6-TG-resistant colonies on a given plate may have arisen from more than one event. For example, if the Poisson function was used to correct the pRV9.1 data for the expected number of plates that resulted from two events, then the gene-targeting frequency would be 1/800 G418-resistant colonies rather than 1/950 G418-resistant colonies.
