# Abstract
One of the characteristics of the central nervous system is the lack of a classical lymphatic drainage system. Although it is now accepted that the central nervous system undergoes constant immune surveillance that takes place within the meningeal compartment, the mechanisms governing the entrance and exit of immune cells from the central nervous system remain poorly understood. In searching for T-cell gateways into and out of the meninges, we discovered functional lymphatic vessels lining the dural sinuses. These structures express all of the molecular hallmarks of lymphatic endothelial cells, are able to carry both fluid and immune cells from the cerebrospinal fluid, and are connected to the deep cervical lymph nodes. The unique location of these vessels may have impeded their discovery to date, thereby contributing to the long-held concept of the absence of lymphatic vasculature in the central nervous system. The discovery of the central nervous system lymphatic system may call for a reassessment of basic assumptions in neuroimmunology and sheds new light on the aetiology of neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases associated with immune system dysfunction.

# Introduction
Seeking to identify routes responsible for the recirculation of surveying meningeal immune cells, we investigated the meningeal spaces and the immune cells that occupy those spaces. First, a whole-mount preparation of dissected mouse brain meninges was developed and stained by immunohistochemistry for endothelial cells, T cells and major histocompatibility complex II (MHCII)-expressing cells. Labelling of these cells revealed a restricted partitioning of immune cells throughout the meningeal compartments, with a high concentration of cells found in close proximity to the dural sinuses.

The dural sinuses drain blood from both the internal and the external veins of the brain into the internal jugular veins. The exact localization of the T lymphocytes around the sinuses was examined to rule out the possibility of artefacts caused by incomplete intracardial perfusion. Coronal sections of the dura mater were stained for CD3ε (T cells) and for CD31 (endothelial cells). Indeed, the vast majority of the T lymphocytes near the sinuses were abluminal. To confirm this finding, mice were injected intravenously with DyLight 488 lectin or fluorescent anti-CD45 antibody before euthanasia and the abluminal localization was confirmed and quantified. Unexpectedly, a portion of T cells (and of MHCII-expressing cells) was aligned linearly in CD31-expressing structures along the sinuses (only few cells were evident in meningeal blood vessels of similar diameter), suggesting a unique function for these perisinusal vessels.

# Main
In addition to the cardiovascular system, the lymphatic vessels represent a distinct and prominent vascular system in the body.

Prompted by our observations, the perisinusal vessels were tested for markers associated with lymphatic endothelial cells (LEC). Whole-mount meninges from adult mice were immunostained for the LEC marker, Lyve-1. Two to three Lyve-1-expressing vessels were identified running parallel to the dural sinuses. Analysis of coronal sections labelled for Lyve-1 and the endothelial cell marker, CD31, revealed that Lyve-1 vessels are located adjacent to the sinus and exhibit a distinct lumen. Intravenous injection of DyLight 488 lectin before euthanasia confirmed that these Lyve-1+ vessels do not belong to the cardiovasculature.

The lymphatic character of the perisinusal vessels was further interrogated by assessing the presence of several classical LEC markers. Expression of the main LEC transcription factor, Prox1, was indeed detectable in the Lyve-1+ vessels using immunostaining in wild-type mice or in transgenic mice expressing tdTomato (tdT) under the Prox1 promoter. Similar to peripheral lymphatic vessels, the Lyve-1 vessels were also found to express podoplanin and the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 3 (VEGFR3). Injection of VEGFR3-specific recombinant VEGF-c into the cisterna magna resulted in an increase in the diameter of the meningeal lymphatic vessels, when examined 7 days after the injection, suggesting a functional role of VEGFR3 on meningeal LECs. Finally, the presence of LECs in the meninges was confirmed by flow cytometry; a CD45- CD31+ podoplanin+ population of cells (LECs) was detected in the dura mater, and is similar to that found in the skin and diaphragm. We identified a potentially similar structure in human dura (Lyve-1+ podoplanin+ CD68-), but further studies will be necessary to fully assess and characterize the location and organization of meningeal lymphatic vessels in the human central nervous system.

Two types of afferent lymphatic vessels exist—initial and collecting. They differ anatomically (that is, the presence or absence of surrounding smooth muscle cells and lymphatic valves), in their expression pattern of adhesion molecules, and in their permissiveness to fluid and cell entry. In contrast to the sinuses, the meningeal lymphatic vessels are devoid of smooth muscle cells. Furthermore, meningeal lymphatic vessels were also positive for the immune-cell chemoattractant protein, CCL21. Unlike the blood vessels that exhibit a continuous pattern of Claudin-5 and vascular endothelial (VE)-cadherin, the meningeal lymphatic vessels exhibit a punctate expression pattern of these molecules similarly to diaphragm lymphatic vessels. Also, expression of integrin α9, which is characteristic of lymphatic valves, was not found on meningeal lymphatic vessels, but was readily detectable in the skin lymphatic network. Collectively, these findings indicate that the meningeal lymphatic vessels possess anatomical and molecular features characteristic of initial lymphatic vessels. Furthermore, electron microscopy of whole-mount meninges revealed typical ultrastructural characteristics of the lymphatic vessels, which exhibited a non-continuous basement membrane surrounded by anchoring filaments.

While possessing many of the same attributes as peripheral lymphatic vessels, the general organization and distribution of the meningeal lymphatic vasculature displays certain unique features. The meningeal lymphatic network appears to start from both eyes and track above the olfactory bulb before aligning adjacent to the sinuses. Compared to the diaphragm, the meningeal lymphatic network covers less of the tissue and forms a less complex network composed of narrower vessels. The vessels are larger and more complex in the transverse sinuses than in the superior sagittal sinus. The differences in the vessel network could be due to the environment in which the vessels reside—the high cerebrospinal fluid pressure in the central nervous system compared to the interstitial fluid pressure in peripheral tissues could affect the branching of the vessels and also limit their expansion.

Next, the functional capability of the meningeal lymphatic vessels to carry fluid and cells from the meninges/cerebrospinal fluid was examined. Anaesthetized adult mice were simultaneously injected with fluorescein intravenously and with fluorescent tracer dye (QDot655) intracerebroventricularly, and then imaged through thinned skull by multiphoton microscopy. Vessels filled with QDot655, but not with fluorescein, were seen aligned along the superior sagittal sinus, suggesting that non-cardiovascular vessels drain cerebrospinal fluid. This cerebrospinal fluid drainage into meningeal vessels may occur in addition to the previously described cerebrospinal fluid filtration into the dural sinuses via arachnoid granulations. Injection of Alexa488-conjugated anti-Lyve-1 antibody intracerebroventricularly labelled the meningeal lymphatic vessels. Moreover, co-injection of a QDot655 and an Alexa488-conjugated anti-Lyve-1 antibody intracerebroventricularly demonstrated that the meningeal lymphatic vessels were indeed filled with QDot655, and thus were draining the cerebrospinal fluid. Imaging of the QDot655-filled lymphatic vessels revealed a slower flow rate but similar direction of flow in the meningeal lymphatic vessels compared to the adjacent blood vessels, similar to what is observed outside of the central nervous system.

Classic lymphatic vessels, in addition to draining interstitial fluids, allow cells to travel from tissues to draining lymph nodes. We therefore examined whether the meningeal lymphatic vessels were capable of carrying leukocytes. Immunohistochemical analysis of whole-mount meninges revealed that approximately 24% of all sinusal T cells and approximately 12% of all sinusal MHCII+ cells were found within these vessels. Moreover, CD11c+ cells and B220+ cells are also found in the meningeal lymphatic vessels of naive mice.

Cellular and soluble constituents of the cerebrospinal fluid have been shown to elicit immune responses in the cervical lymph nodes. Their proposed path is via the cribriform plate into lymphatic vessels within the nasal mucosa. To determine whether meningeal lymphatic vessels communicate with deep cervical lymph nodes directly, we injected mice with Evans blue intracerebroventricularly and examined peripheral lymph nodes for the presence of the dye over a 2 h period. Thirty minutes after injection, Evans blue was detected in the meningeal lymphatic vessels and the sinus, as expected, and had also drained into the deep cervical lymph nodes, but not into the superficial cervical lymph nodes. At later time points, Evans blue was also present in the superficial cervical lymph nodes. Virtually no Evans blue was seen in the surrounding non-lymphatic tissue at the time points tested. Interestingly, no Evans blue was detected in the deep cervical lymph nodes 30 min after direct injection into the nasal mucosa, suggesting that meningeal lymphatic vessels and not nasal mucosa lymphatic vessels represent the primary route for drainage of cerebrospinal fluid-derived soluble and cellular constituents into the deep cervical lymph nodes during this time frame.

Resection of the deep cervical lymph nodes affected the T-cell compartment of the meninges, resulting in an increase in the number of meningeal T cells. This presumably resulted from an inability of T cells to drain from the meningeal spaces, consistent with a direct connection between the meninges and the deep cervical lymph nodes. To further demonstrate this connection, we ligated the lymph vessels that drain into the deep cervical lymph nodes, and injected the mice intracerebroventricularly with Evans blue. No accumulation of Evans blue was evident in the deep cervical lymph nodes of ligated mice, as opposed to dye accumulation in the sham-operated controls. Moreover, an increase in the diameter of the meningeal lymphatic vessels was observed, similar to lymphoedema observed in peripheral tissues. These results further suggest physical connection between the meningeal lymphatic vessels and the deep cervical lymph nodes.

# Discussion
Drainage of the cerebrospinal fluid into the periphery has been a subject of interest for decades and several routes have been described regarding how cerebrospinal fluid can leave the central nervous system. The newly discovered meningeal lymphatic vessels are a novel path for cerebrospinal fluid drainage and represent a more conventional path for immune cells to egress the central nervous system. Our findings may represent the second step in the drainage of the interstitial fluid from the brain parenchyma into the periphery after it has been drained into the cerebrospinal fluid through the recently discovered glymphatic system.

The presence of a functional and classical lymphatic system in the central nervous system suggests that current dogmas regarding brain tolerance and the immune privilege of the brain should be revisited. Malfunction of the meningeal lymphatic vessels could be a root cause of a variety of neurological disorders in which altered immunity is a fundamental player such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, and some forms of primary lymphoedema that are associated with neurological disorders.

# Methods
No statistical methods were used to predetermine sample size.

Animals. Male and female C57Bl/6, NOD.Cd11c-YFP and Prox1 tdT mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories and were housed in temperature and humidity controlled rooms, maintained on a 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle. All strains were kept in identical housing conditions. All procedures complied with regulations of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at University of Virginia. Only adult animals (eight to ten weeks) were used in this study. Sample size was chosen in accordance with similar, previously published experiments. Animals from different cages in the same experimental group were selected to assure randomization. For all experiments, investigators were blinded from the time of euthanasia to the end of the analysis.

Human samples. Autopsy specimens of human dura including the superior sagittal sinus were obtained from the Departments of Pathology and Neurosurgery at the University of Virginia. All samples are from consenting patients that gave no restriction to the use of their body for research and teaching. All obtained samples were fixed and stored in a 10% formalin solution for prolonged time periods.

Meninges immunohistochemistry. Mice were euthanized with an intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of Euthasol and perfused with 0.1 M of PBS for 5 min. Skin was removed from the head and the muscle was stripped from the bone. After removal of the mandibles and the skull rostral to maxillae, the top of the skull was removed with surgical scissors. Whole-mount meninges were fixed while still attached to the skull cap in PBS with 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 24 h at 4 °C or in 1:1 ethanol:acetone solution for 20 min at -20 °C depending on the antibody. The dura/arachnoid was then dissected from the skullcap. For analysis of the pia mater, brains extracted from the skull were flash frozen, and 40-μm-thick transverse sections were sliced using a cryostat. The choroid plexus was dissected out of the ventricles of non-fixed brain and fixed with 2% PFA in PBS for 24 h. For coronal sectioning of whole-mount meninges, 100 μl of Matrigel was injected into the dural sinuses before dissection. The meninges (dura mater/arachnoid) were dissected from the skullcap, flash frozen, and 10-μm-thick sections were cut using a cryostat, and the slices were placed on gelatin-coated slides.

Whole mounts and sections were incubated with PBS containing 2% of normal serum (either goat or chicken), 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton-X-100 and 0.05% of Tween 20 for 1 h at room temperature, followed by incubation with appropriate dilutions of primary antibodies: anti-CD31 (eBioscience, clone 390, 1:100); anti-CD3ε (eBioscience, clone 17A2, 1:500), anti-MHC II (eBioscience, clone M5/114.15.2, 1:500), anti-Lyve-1 (eBioscience, clone ALY7, 1:200), anti-Prox1 (Angiobio, 11002, 1:500), anti-podoplanin (eBioscience, clone 8.1.1, 1:100), anti-VEGFR3 (R&D Systems, AF743, 1:100), anti-α-SMA (Sigma-Aldrich, clone 1A4, 1:500), anti-VE-cadherin (eBioscience, clone BV13, 1:100), anti-Claudin-5 (Molecular Probes, 352588, 1:200), anti-CCL21 (R&D Systems, AF457, 1:100), anti-integrin α9 (R&D Systems, AF3827, 1:100), anti-B220 (eBioscience, clone RA3-6B2, 1:100), anti-CD11c (eBioscience, clone N418, 1:100) overnight at 4 °C in PBS containing 1% BSA and 0.5% Triton-X-100. Whole mounts and sections were then washed 3 times for 5 min at room temperature in PBS followed by incubation with Alexafluor 488/594/647 chicken/goat anti rabbit/goat IgG antibodies (Invitrogen, 1:1,000) or PE/Cy3 conjugated streptavidin (eBioscience, 1:1,000) for 1 h at room temperature in PBS with 1% BSA and 0.5% Triton-X-100. After 5 min in 1:10,000 DAPI reagent, whole mount and section were washed with PBS and mounted with Aqua-Mount (Lerner) under coverslips. For the pre-absorption experiments, the anti-VEGFR3 and anti-podoplanin antibodies were incubated respectively with recombinant mouse VEGFR3 or recombinant mouse podoplanin at the concentration ratio of 1:10 overnight at 4 °C in PBS containing 1% BSA and 0.5% Triton-X-100 before staining.

For human samples, formalin-fixed superior sagittal sinuses were dissected in 2-mm thick sections and fixed overnight in PBS with 4% PFA. Tissues were then embedded in OCT and 10-μm-thick sections were sliced onto gelatin-coated slides on a cryostat. Antigen retrieval was performed by incubation of the slides for 20 min in sodium citrate buffer pH 6.0 at 80 °C. After washing with PBS, endogenous biotins were blocked with a 30 min incubation in PBS with 3% H2O2, then the slides were blocked in PBS containing 2% of normal goat serum, 1% BSA, 0.1% Triton-X-100 and 0.05% Tween 20 for 1 h at room temperature. Slides were then incubated overnight at 4 °C with anti-Lyve-1 (ab36993, Abcam, 1:200), anti-podoplanin (HPA007534, Sigma-Aldrich, 1:200) or anti-CD68 (HPA048982, Sigma-Aldrich, 1:1,000) diluted in PBS with 1% BSA and 0.5% Triton-X-100. Sections were then washed 3 times for 5 min at room temperature in PBS followed by incubation with biotin-conjugated goat anti-rabbit antibody (Jackson Immunoresearch, 1:1,000) for 1 h at room temperature, then for 30 min at room temperature with ABC kit solutions (Vectastain, Vector Labs). Slides were then incubated with the peroxidase substrate DAB (Sigma-Aldrich) for several minutes, counterstained with haematoxylin, dehydrated, and mounted in Cytoseal 60 (Thermo Scientific) under coverslips.

Image analysis. Images were acquired with a Leica TCS SP8 confocal system using the LAS AF Software. For the images of the complete whole mount, images were acquired with a 10x objective with 0.25 NA. Other confocal images were acquired using a 20x objective with 0.70 NA or a 40x oil immersion objective with 1.30 NA. All images were acquired at a 512 x 512 pixel resolution and with a z-step of 4 μm. Quantitative assessments were performed using FIJI software (NIH). Percentage of luminal T cells was determined by counting the number of T cells with luminal localization in the sinuses area. T cell density was established by dividing the number of T lymphocytes by the area of meninges. Prox1+ cell density was defined by dividing the number of Prox1+ nuclei by the area of lymphatic vessels. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software. Specific statistical tests are presented in the text for each experiment. Outlier samples were eliminated using the Grubbs' test with a significance level of 0.01. No estimate of variation between groups was performed.

Electron microscopy. Meninges were harvested as previously described and fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4, and post-fixed in 2% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer with 0.15% potassium ferrocyanide. After rinsing in buffer, the tissue was dehydrated through a series of graded ethanol to propylene oxide, infiltrated and embedded in epoxy resin and polymerized at 70 °C overnight. Semi-thin sections (0.5 μm) were stained with toluidine blue for light microscope examination. Ultrathin sections (80 nm) were cut and imaged using the Tecnai TF20 TEM with an AMT XR41 camera or using the Tecnai F20 TEM with an UltraScan CCD camera.

Multiphoton microscopy. Mice were anaesthetized by ketamine/xylazine injection i.p. and injected i.c.v. with 5 μl of QDot655 (Invitrogen) or 5 μl of Alexa488-conjugated anti-Lyve-1 antibody. Mice were co-injected i.v. with 25 μl of 10% fluorescein sodium salt or 5 μl of QDot655. Meningeal lymphatic vessels were imaged through a thinned skull preparation. The core temperature of the mice was monitored and maintained at 37 °C. Imaging was performed with a Leica TCS SP8 multiphoton microscopy system equipped with a Chameleon Ultra II tunable Ti:Sapphire laser. GFP and QDot655 were excited with an excitation wavelength of 880 nm. Images were obtained using a 25x water immersion objective with 0.95 NA and external HyD non-descanned detectors. Four-dimensional imaging data were collected by obtaining images from the x, y, and z-planes over time. The resulting images were analysed with Imaris software.

Labelling of the vascular compartment. To assess the abluminal localization of the sinusal T cells, mice were injected i.v. with 10 μg of FITC-conjugated anti-CD45 antibody or control isotype 1 h before euthanasia. To assess that the meningeal lymphatic vessels are not part of the cardiovasculature, mice were injected with 100 μl of DyLight 488 Lycopersicon Esculentum Lectin 5 min before euthanasia.

In vivo VEGFR3 activation. Mice were injected i.c.v. with 4 μg of rh-VEGF-c (Cys156Ser) or with PBS. Meninges were harvested 7 and 14 days after the injection.

Evans blue injection and detection. Mice were anaesthetized by ketamine/xylazine injection i.p., and then 5 μl of 10% Evans blue was injected i.c.v. into the cisterna magna or intranasally. Thirty minutes after injection, mice were euthanized with CO2 and the central nervous system draining lymph nodes were dissected for assessment of Evans blue content. The dura mater was also harvested to analyse Evans Blue localization using confocal microscopy. The intensity of the Evans blue was measured using the plot profile function of FIJI.

Flow cytometric analysis of meninges. Mice were perfused with 0.1 M PBS for 5 min. Heads were removed and skulls were quickly stripped. Mandibles were removed, as well as all skull material rostral to maxillae. Surgical scissors were used to remove the top of the skull. Meninges were carefully removed from the interior aspect of the skulls and surfaces of the brain. Meninges were gently pressed through 70 μm nylon mesh cell strainers to yield a single-cell suspension. For lymphatic endothelial cells isolation, meninges (along with diaphragm and ear skin) were digested for 1 h in 0.41 U/ml of Liberase TM and 60 U/ml of DNase 1. Cells were then centrifuged at 280 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was removed and cells were resuspended in ice-cold FACS buffer. Cells were stained for extracellular markers with antibodies to CD45-PacificBlue, CD45-phycoerythrin (PE)-Cy7 or eFluor 450, TCRβ-Alexa780, CD4-Alexa488, CD8-peridinin chlorophyll (PerCP)-Cy5.5, CD44-allophycocyanin (APC), CD62L-PE, CD71-APC, podoplanin-PE, CD31-Alexa647, B220-PE, CD19-BB515. Except for the lymphatic endothelial cells identification experiment, all cells were fixed in 1% PFA in 0.1 M pH 7.4 PBS. Fluorescence data were collected with a CyAn ADP High-Performance Flow Cytometer or a Gallios then analysed using FlowJo software. To obtain accurate cells counts, single cells were gated using the height, area and the pulse width of the forward and side scatter, then cells were selected for being live cells using the LIVE/DEAD Fixable Dead Cell Stain Kit. The cells were then gated for the appropriate markers for cell type. Data processing was done with Excel and statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism.

Deep cervical lymph node resection, ligation and sham surgery. Eight-week old mice were anaesthetized with ketamine/xylazine, shaved at the neck and cleaned with iodine and 70% ethanol, and an ophthalmic solution was put on the eyes to prevent drying. An incision was made midline 5 mm superior to the clavicle. The sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) was retracted, and the deep cervical lymph node was removed with forceps. For the ligation experiment, the collecting lymphatic vessels anterior to the deep cervical lymph nodes were ligated using a nylon suture. Sham-operated mice received the incision and had the SCM retracted, but were not ligated or the lymph nodes were not removed. Mice were then sutured and allowed to recover on a heating pad until responsive. Post-surgery, mice were given analgesic in the drinking water: 50 mg/l for 3 days post-surgery and 0.16 mg for the next 2 weeks.
