THE DEPENDENCE OF CELL-FREE PROTEIN SYNTHESIS IN E. COLI UPON NATURALLY OCCURRING OR SYNTHETIC POLYRIBONUCLEOTIDES

BY MARSHALL W. NIRENBERG AND J. HEINRICH MATTHAEI

# Abstract
A stable, cell-free system has been obtained from E. coli in which the amount of incorporation of amino acids into protein was dependent upon the addition of heat-stable template RNA preparations. Soluble RNA could not replace template RNA fractions. In addition, the amino acid incorporation required both ribosomes and 105,000 x g supernatant solution. The correlation between the amount of incorporation and the amount of added RNA suggested stoichiometric rather than catalytic activity of the template RNA. The template RNA-dependent amino acid incorporation also required ATP and an ATP-generating system, was stimulated by a complete mixture of L-amino acids, and was markedly inhibited by puromycin, chloramphenicol, and RNAase. Addition of a synthetic polynucleotide, polyuridylic acid, specifically resulted in the incorporation of L-phenylalanine into a protein resembling poly-L-phenylalanine. Polyuridylic acid appears to function as a synthetic template or messenger RNA. The implications of these findings are briefly discussed.

# Introduction
A stable cell-free system has been obtained from E. coli which incorporates C14-valine into protein at a rapid rate. It was shown that this apparent protein synthesis was energy-dependent, was stimulated by a mixture of L-amino acids, and was markedly inhibited by RNAase, puromycin, and chloramphenicol. The present communication describes a novel characteristic of the system, that is, a requirement for template RNA, needed for amino acid incorporation even in the presence of soluble RNA and ribosomes. It will also be shown that the amino acid incorporation stimulated by the addition of template RNA has many properties expected of de novo protein synthesis. Naturally occurring RNA as well as a synthetic polynucleotide were active in this system. The synthetic polynucleotide appears to contain the code for the synthesis of a "protein" containing only one amino acid. Part of these data have been presented in preliminary reports.

# Methods
The preparation of enzyme extracts was modified in certain respects from the procedure previously presented. E. coli W3100 cells harvested in early log phase were washed and were disrupted by grinding with alumina (twice the weight of washed cells) at 5° for 5 min as described previously. The alumina was extracted with an equivalent weight of buffer containing 0.01 M Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, pH 7.8, 0.01 M magnesium acetate, 0.06 M KCl, 0.006 M mercaptoethanol (standard buffer). Alumina and intact cells were removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant fluid was decanted, and 3 μg DNAase per ml were added, rapidly reducing the viscosity of the suspension, which was then centrifuged again at 20,000 x g for 20 min. The supernatant fluid was aspirated and was centrifuged at 30,000 x g for 30 min to clear the extract of remaining debris. The liquid layer was aspirated (S-30) and was centrifuged at 105,000 x g for 2 hr to sediment the ribosomes. The supernatant solution (S-100) was aspirated, and the solution just above the pellet was decanted and discarded. The ribosomes were washed by resuspension in the standard buffer and centrifugation again at 105,000 x g for 2 hr. Supernatant fluid was discarded and the ribosomes were suspended in standard buffer (W-Rib). Fractions S-30, S-100, and W-Rib were dialyzed against 60 volumes of standard buffer overnight at 5° and were divided into aliquots for storage at -15°.

In some cases, fresh S-30 was incubated for 40 min at 35°. The reaction mixture components in μmoles per ml were as follows: 80 Tris, pH 7.8; 8 magnesium acetate; 50 KCl; 9 mercaptoethanol; 0.075 each of 20 amino acids; 2.5 ATP, K salt; 2.5 PEP, K salt; 15 μg PEP kinase. After incubation, the reaction mixture was dialyzed at 5° for 10 hr against 60 volumes of standard buffer, changed once during the course of dialysis. The incubated S-30 fraction was stored in aliquots at -15° until needed (Incubated-S-30).

RNA fractions were prepared by phenol extraction using freshly distilled phenol. Ribosomal RNA was prepared from fresh, washed ribosomes obtained by the method given above. In later RNA preparations, a 0.2% solution of sodium dodecyl sulfate recrystallized by the method of Crestfield et al. was added to the suspension of ribosomes before phenol treatment. The suspension was shaken at room temperature for 5 min. Higher yields of RNA appeared to be obtained when the sodium dodecyl sulfate step was used; however, good RNA preparations were also obtained when this step was omitted. An equal volume of H2O-saturated phenol was added to ribosomes suspended in standard buffer after treatment with sodium dodecyl sulfate, and the suspension was shaken vigorously at room temperature for 8-10 min. The aqueous phase was aspirated from the phenol phase after centrifugation at 1,450 x g for 15 min. The aqueous layer was extracted two more times in the same manner, using 1/2 volume of H2O-saturated phenol in each case. The final aqueous phase was chilled to 5° and NaCl was added to a final concentration of 0.1%. Two volumes of ethyl alcohol at -20° were added with stirring to precipitate the RNA. The suspension was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min and the supernatant solution was decanted and discarded. The RNA pellet was dissolved in minimal concentrations of standard buffer (minus mercaptoethanol) by gentle homogenization in a glass Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer. The opalescent solution of RNA was dialyzed for 18 hr against 100 volumes of standard buffer (minus mercaptoethanol) at 5°. After dialysis, the RNA solution was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 15 min and the pellet was discarded. The RNA solution, which contained less than 1% protein, was divided into aliquots and was stored at -15° until needed.

Soluble RNA was prepared from 105,000 x g supernatant solution by the phenol extraction method described above. Soluble RNA was also stored at -15°. Alkali-degraded RNA was prepared by incubating RNA samples with 0.3 M KOH at 35° for 18 hr. The solutions then were neutralized and dialyzed against standard buffer (minus mercaptoethanol). RNAase-digested samples of RNA were prepared by incubating RNA with 2 μg per ml of crystalline RNAase at 35° for 60 min. RNAase was destroyed by four phenol extractions. After the last phenol extraction, the samples were dialyzed against standard buffer minus mercaptoethanol. RNA samples were treated with trypsin by incubation with 20 μg per ml of twice recrystallized trypsin at 35° for 60 min. The solution was treated four times with phenol and was dialyzed in the same manner.

The radioactive amino acids used and their source are as follows: U-C14-glycine, U-C14-L-isoleucine, U-C14-L-tyrosine, U-C14-L-leucine, U-C14-L-proline, L-histidine-2(ring)-C14, U-C14-L-phenylalanine, U-C14-L-threonine, L-methionine (methyl-C14), U-C14-L-arginine, and U-C14-L-lysine; C14-L-aspartic acid, C14-L-glutamic acid, C14-L-alanine; D-L-tryptophan-3-C14; S35-L-cystine; U-C14-L-serine. Other materials and methods used in this study are described in the accompanying paper. All assays were performed in duplicate.

# Main
It was shown previously that DNAase markedly decreased amino acid incorporation in this system after 20 min. For the purpose of this investigation, 30,000 x g supernatant fluid fractions previously incubated with DNAase and other components of the reaction mixtures (Incubated-S-30 fractions) were used for many of the experiments.

Results show that incorporation of C14-valine into protein by Incubated-S-30 fraction was stimulated by the addition of purified E. coli soluble RNA. Maximal stimulation was obtained with approximately 1 mg soluble RNA. In some experiments, increasing the concentration 5-fold did not further stimulate the system. Soluble RNA was added to all reaction mixtures unless otherwise specified. Results demonstrate that E. coli ribosomal RNA preparations markedly stimulated incorporation of C14-valine into protein even though maximally stimulating concentrations of soluble RNA were present in the reaction mixtures. A linear relationship between the concentration of ribosomal RNA and C14-valine incorporation into protein was obtained when low concentrations of ribosomal RNA were used. Increasing the soluble RNA concentration up to 3-fold did not replace the effect observed when ribosomal RNA was added.

The effect of ribosomal RNA in stimulating incorporation of C14-valine into protein was further investigated. In the absence of ribosomal RNA, incorporation of C14-valine into protein by the incubated-S-30 fraction was quite low when compared with S-30 and stopped almost completely after 30 min. At low concentrations of ribosomal RNA, maximum amino acid incorporation into protein was proportional to the amount of ribosomal RNA added, suggesting stoichiometric rather than catalytic action of ribosomal RNA. Total incorporation of C14-valine into protein was increased more than 3-fold by ribosomal RNA in this experiment even in the presence of maximally stimulating concentrations of soluble RNA. Ribosomal RNA may be added at any time during the course of the reaction, and, after further incubation, an increase in incorporation of C14-valine into protein will result.

The characteristics of C14-valine incorporation into protein stimulated by the addition of ribosomal RNA show that amino acid incorporation was strongly inhibited by 0.15 μmoles of chloramphenicol and 0.20 μmoles/ml reaction mixture of puromycin. Furthermore, the incorporation was completely dependent upon the addition of ATP and an ATP-generating system and was totally inhibited by 10 μg/ml RNAase. Equivalent amounts of DNAase had no effect upon the incorporation stimulated by the addition of ribosomal RNA. Placing a ribosomal RNA preparation in a boiling water bath for 10 min did not destroy its C14-valine incorporation activity; instead, a slight increase in activity was consistently observed. However, when these RNA preparations were placed in a boiling water bath, a copious, white precipitate resulted. Upon cooling the suspension in an ice bath, the precipitate immediately dissolved.

The results also demonstrate that the incorporation of amino acids into protein in the presence of ribosomal RNA was further stimulated by the addition of a mixture of 20 L-amino acids, suggesting cell-free protein synthesis.

C- and N-terminal analyses of the ribosomal RNA-dependent product of the reaction were performed with carboxypeptidase and 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene respectively. Four per cent of the radioactivity was released from the C-terminal end and 1% was associated with the N-terminal end. The remainder of the C14-label was internal. Similar results were obtained when reactions were performed using S-30 enzyme fractions which had not been treated with DNAase. Protein precipitates isolated from reaction mixtures after incubation were completely hydrolyzed with HCl, and the C14-label incorporated into protein was demonstrated to be valine by paper chromatography.

Ribosomal RNA also stimulated C14-valine incorporation when enzyme extracts prepared in the absence of DNAase were used. To be effective in stimulating amino acid incorporation into protein, the ribosomal RNA required the presence of washed ribosomes. The data show that both ribosomes and 105,000 x g supernatant solution were necessary for ribosomal RNA-dependent amino acid incorporation. No incorporation of amino acids into protein occurred when the 105,000 x g supernatant solution alone was added to ribosomal RNA preparations, demonstrating that ribosomal RNA preparations were not contaminated with intact ribosomes. This conclusion also was substantiated by showing that the activities of ribosomal RNA preparations were not destroyed by boiling, although the activities of the ribosomes were destroyed by such treatment. The addition of ribosomal RNA increased the incorporation of every amino acid tested.

The effect shown by ribosomal RNA was not observed when other polyanions were used, such as polyadenylic acid, highly polymerized salmon sperm DNA, or a high-molecular-weight polymer of glucose carboxylic acid. Pretreatment of ribosomal RNA with trypsin did not affect its biological activity. However, treatment of the ribosomal RNA with either RNAase or alkali resulted in a complete loss of stimulating activity. The active principle, therefore, appears to be RNA.

The sedimentation characteristics of the ribosomal RNA preparations were examined in the Spinco Model E ultracentrifuge. Particles having the characteristics of S-30, S-50, or S-70 ribosomes were not observed in these preparations. The S values of the peaks were approximately 23, 16, and 4. Pretreatment with trypsin did not affect the S values of the peaks appreciably; however, treatment with RNAase completely destroyed the peaks, confirming the evidence which suggested that the major component was high-molecular-weight RNA.

Preliminary attempts at fractionation of the ribosomal RNA were performed by means of density-gradient centrifugation employing a linear sucrose gradient. Amino acid incorporation activity did not follow absorbancy at 260 mμ; instead, the activity was concentrated around a fraction approximately one-third from the bottom of the tube. These results again demonstrate that the activity was not associated with a soluble RNA fraction. In addition, all amino acid incorporation analyses were performed in the presence of added soluble RNA, and the addition of more soluble RNA would not stimulate C14-valine incorporation into protein.

The data demonstrate that RNA from different sources stimulates C14-valine incorporation into protein. Yeast ribosomal RNA was considerably more effective in stimulating incorporation than equivalent amounts of E. coli ribosomal RNA. Yeast ribosomal RNA prepared by this method has little or no amino acid acceptor activity and has a molecular weight of 0.7 x 10^6. Tobacco mosaic virus RNA with a molecular weight of approximately 1,700,000 stimulated amino acid incorporation strongly. Marked stimulation due to tobacco mosaic virus RNA was observed also with E. coli enzyme extracts which had not been treated with DNAase.

The data show that the addition of 10 μg of polyuridylic acid per ml of reaction mixture resulted in a remarkable stimulation of C14-phenylalanine incorporation. Phenylalanine incorporation was almost completely dependent upon the addition of polyuridylic acid, and incorporation proceeded, after a slight lag period, at a linear rate for approximately 30 min.

The data demonstrate that no other polynucleotide tested could replace polyuridylic acid. The absolute specificity of polyuridylic acid was confirmed by demonstrating that randomly mixed polymers of adenylic and uridylic acid were inactive in this system. A solution of polyuridylic acid and polyadenylic acid (which forms triple-stranded helices) had no activity whatsoever, suggesting that single-strandedness is a necessary requisite for activity. Further results demonstrate that UMP, UDP, or UTP were unable to stimulate phenylalanine incorporation.

Both ribosomes and 105,000 x g supernatant solution, as well as ATP and an ATP-generating system, were required for the polyuridylic acid-dependent incorporation of phenylalanine. Incorporation was inhibited by puromycin, chloramphenicol, and RNAase. The incorporation was not inhibited by addition of DNAase. Omitting a mixture of 19 L-amino acids did not inhibit phenylalanine incorporation, suggesting that polyuridylic acid stimulated the incorporation of L-phenylalanine alone. This conclusion was substantiated by the fact that polyuridylic acid had little effect in stimulating the incorporation of 17 other radioactive amino acids.

The product of the reaction was purified by means of its unusual solubility behavior. Seventy per cent of the total amount of C14-phenylalanine incorporated into protein due to the addition of polyuridylic acid could be recovered. Complete hydrolysis of the purified reaction product with 12N HCl followed by paper electrophoresis demonstrated that the reaction product contained C14-phenylalanine. No other radioactive spots were found.

# Discussion
In this investigation, we have demonstrated that template RNA is a requirement for cell-free amino acid incorporation. Addition of soluble RNA could not replace template RNA in this system. In addition, the density-gradient centrifugation experiments showed that the active fractions in the ribosomal RNA preparations sedimented much faster than soluble RNA. It should be noted that ribosomal RNA is qualitatively different from soluble RNA, since bases such as pseudouracil, methylated guanines, etc., found in soluble RNA, are not present in ribosomal RNA.

The bulk of the RNA in our ribosomal RNA fractions may be inactive as templates, for tobacco mosaic virus RNA was 20 times as active in stimulating amino acid incorporation as equivalent amounts of E. coli ribosomal RNA. In addition, preliminary fractionation of ribosomal RNA indicated that only a portion of the total RNA was active.

It should be emphasized that ribosomal RNA could not substitute for ribosomes, indicating that ribosomes were not assembled from the added RNA in toto. The function of ribosomal RNA remains an enigma, although at least part of the total RNA is thought to serve as templates for protein synthesis and has been termed "messenger" RNA. Alternatively, a part of the RNA may be essential for the synthesis of active ribosomes from smaller ribosomal particles.

Ribosomal RNA may be an aggregate of subunits which can dissociate after proper treatment. Phenol extraction of E. coli ribosomes yields two types of RNA molecules with S values of 23 and 16, equivalent to molecular weights of 1,000,000 and 560,000, respectively. These RNA species can be degraded by boiling to products having sedimentation coefficients of 13.1, 8.8, and 4.4. Although the sedimentation distributions of the latter preparations suggest a high degree of homogeneity among the molecules of each class, these observations do not eliminate the possibility that the subunits are linked to one another via covalent bonds. Preliminary evidence indicates that the subunits may be active in our system, since the supernatant solution obtained after boiling E. coli ribosomal RNA for 10 min and centrifugation was active. Examination of boiled ribosomal RNA showed a dispersed peak with a sedimentation coefficient of 4-8. This may be the same material found in the sucrose density-gradient experiment where a small peak of activity somewhat heavier than soluble RNA was usually noted.

In our system, at low concentrations of ribosomal RNA, amino acid incorporation into protein was proportional to the amount of ribosomal RNA added, suggesting a stoichiometric rather than a catalytic action of ribosomal RNA. In contrast, soluble RNA has been shown to act in a catalytic fashion. The results indicate that polyuridylic acid contains the information for the synthesis of a protein having many of the characteristics of poly-L-phenylalanine. This synthesis was very similar to the cell-free protein synthesis obtained when naturally-occurring template RNA was added, i.e., both ribosomes and 100,000 x g supernatant solutions were required, and the incorporation was inhibited by puromycin or chloramphenicol. One or more uridylic acid residues therefore appear to be the code for phenylalanine. Whether the code is of the singlet, triplet, etc., type has not yet been determined. Polyuridylic acid seemingly functions as a synthetic template or messenger RNA, and this stable, cell-free E. coli system may well synthesize any protein corresponding to meaningful information contained in added RNA.

The ratio between uridylic acid units of the polymer required and molecules of L-phenylalanine incorporated, in recent experiments, has approached the value of 1:1. Direct evidence for the number of uridylic acid residues forming the code for phenylalanine as well as for the eventual stoichiometric action of the template is not yet established. As polyuridylic acid codes the incorporation of L-phenylalanine, polycytidylic acid specifically mediates the incorporation of L-proline into a TCA-precipitable product.