# Abstract

lin-4 is essential for the normal temporal control of diverse postembryonic developmental events in C. elegans. lin-4 acts by negatively regulating the level of LIN-14 protein, creating a temporal decrease in LIN-14 protein starting in the first larval stage (L1). We have cloned the C. elegans lin-4 locus by chromosomal walking and transformation rescue. We used the C. elegans clone to isolate the gene from three other Caenorhabditis species; all four Caenorhabditis clones functionally rescue the lin-4 null allele of C. elegans. Comparison of the lin-4 genomic sequence from these four species and site-directed mutagenesis of potential open reading frames indicated that lin-4 does not encode a protein. Two small lin-4 transcripts of approximately 22 and 61 nt were identified in C. elegans and found to contain sequences complementary to a repeated sequence element in the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of lin-14 mRNA, suggesting that lin-4 regulates lin-14 translation via an antisense RNA-RNA interaction.

# Introduction

A genetic pathway of heterochronic genes in Caenorhabditis elegans acts to specify the temporal fates of cells during larval development, thereby controlling the timing and sequence of events in diverse postembryonic cell lineages. Mutations in the heterochronic genes can cause either precocious development, in which normally late developmental programs are expressed at early larval stages, or retarded development, in which normally early developmental programs are reiterated at later stages. It is likely that the expression of stage-specific developmental programs by particular cells requires the accurate temporal regulation of the products of the heterochronic genes.

lin-4 acts early in C. elegans larval development to affect the timing of developmental events at essentially all larval stages and in diverse cell types. Animals carrying a lin-4 loss-of-function (lf) mutation, lin-4(e972), display reiterations of early fates at inappropriately late developmental stages; cell lineage patterns normally specific for the L1 are reiterated at later stages, and the animals execute extra larval molts. The consequences of these heterochronic developmental patterns include the absence of adult structures (such as adult cuticle and the vulva) and the prevention of egg laying.

lin-14 null (0) mutations cause a phenotype opposite to that of lin-4(lf) and are completely epistatic to lin-4(lf), which is consistent with lin-4 acting as a negative regulator of lin-14. lin-14(0) mutants skip the expression of L1-specific events and precociously execute programs normally specific for the L2, L3, L4, and adult stages. lin-14 gain-of-function (gf) mutations, which cause inappropriately high lin-14 activity at late stages of development, result in a retarded phenotype virtually identical to that of lin-4(lf). These observations indicate that in wild-type development a high level of lin-14 activity in the early L1 stage specifies L1-specific programs, and lower levels of lin-14 activity in the late L1 specify later stage-specific programs. Thus, the normal developmental progression from the execution of L1 programs to later programs depends critically on the lin-4-dependent decrease in lin-14 activity.

The temporal decrease in lin-14 activity reflects a decrease in the level of LIN-14 protein. LIN-14 protein is normally abundant in the nuclei of late-stage embryos and younger L1 larvae and then is barely detectable by the L2. lin-14 transcripts are constant throughout development, indicating that lin-14 is negatively regulated posttranscriptionally. In lin-4 mutant animals, as in lin-14(gf) mutants, the level of LIN-14 protein remains abnormally high late in development. Mapping of the lin-14(gf) mutations to the 3' UTR of lin-14 mRNA and gene fusion experiments define the lin-14 3' UTR as a necessary and sufficient cis-negative regulatory element of LIN-14 protein level. The temporal decrease in LIN-14 protein levels requires both lin-4 in trans and lin-14 3' UTR sequences in cis. These observations suggest that the lin-4 gene product or products act via the lin-14 3' UTR to inhibit, directly or indirectly, the translation of lin-14 mRNA. To determine the mechanism by which lin-4 developmentally regulates the level of LIN-14 protein, we cloned the lin-4 locus by chromosomal walking and transformation rescue. Our analysis of the lin-4 genomic sequence indicates that lin-4 does not encode a protein product. We have identified two small lin-4 transcripts of approximately 22 and 61 nt. These lin-4 RNAs are complementary to a repeated sequence in the 3' UTR of lin-14 supporting a model in which these lin-4 RNAs could regulate lin-14 translation by an antisense mechanism.

# Main

## Identification of C. elegans lin-4 Genomic DNA

lin-4 is located on the C. elegans genetic map in a region of LGII between bli-3 and dpy-10. We mapped the positions of restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) in the bli-3-dpy-10 interval with respect to lin-4. Among the RFLPs that we analyzed, maP12, detected by cosmid ZK459, mapped closest to lin-4, and to the right. We used cosmid and yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clones to the left of ZK459 as probes to southern blots of wild-type and lin-4(e972) DNA. The YAC clone Y18C1 detected a restriction fragment alteration associated with lin-4(e972) DNA. This lesion, which results in the absence of a 5 kb EcoRI hybridizing band, was not detected by an overlapping YAC clone, Y42A4.

We cloned the wild-type sequences corresponding to the e972-affected 5 kb band based on its differential hybridization to Y18C1 and Y42A4. Three classes of clones were identified, each corresponding to a unique EcoRI insert: pVT2D (containing a 5 kb insert), pVT1C (a distinct 5 kb insert), and pVT6G (a 3.5 kb insert). Probes from pVT2D, pVT1C, pVT6G, and an overlapping cosmid clone, C02B6, detected restriction fragment aberrations on southern blots of lin-4(e972) DNA, indicating that the e972 lesion must extend over several kb of DNA. We have not characterized the e972 lesion in detail, except to determine that sequences corresponding to both pVT2D and pVT1C are at least partially deleted, and that the pVT6G insert fragment seems to be rearranged and possibly duplicated.

Functional lin-4 sequences were localized to pVT2D by transformation rescue. pVT2D, pVT2DCla (a 3.2 kb subclone of pVT2D), and C02B6 (a cosmid clone that overlaps pVT2D) rescued the mutant phenotype of lin-4(e972) animals in transgenic lines generated by microinjection of the cloned DNA. These results indicate that the lin-4 gene lies within the 3.2 kb EcoRI-ClaI insert fragment of pVT2DCla. The e972 lesion is a deletion of most of the sequences of pVT2D, including about half of the sequences in pVT2DCla. Subclones and ExoIII deletion derivatives of pVT2DCla were tested for rescue of lin-4(e972) defects in transgenic animals. A subclone (pVTSal3) containing a 693 bp SalI fragment also fully rescues lin-4(e972). Less than a hundred base pairs (bp) of the corresponding genomic SalI fragment remain in lin-4(e972) DNA, strongly suggesting that e972 completely eliminates lin-4 gene activity. The fact that the 693 bp SalI fragment rescues in either orientation in the vector indicates that rescue probably does not depend on sequences within the vector and that the complete lin-4 gene is included in these 693 bp.

## Phylogenetic Comparison of lin-4 Genomic Sequence

C. briggsae and C. remanei lin-4 clones were identified by hybridization to a C. elegans lin-4 probe, and a C. vulgaris lin-4 clone was constructed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified genomic DNA. The C. briggsae, C. remanei, and C. vulgaris clones were tested for rescue of the mutant phenotypes of lin-4(e972) and were found to be fully functional for rescue in C. elegans. It is likely that the clones from C. briggsae, C. remanei, and C. vulgaris correspond to the lin-4 locus of each species, because they all function in C. elegans, and because lin-4 seems to be a single copy gene in C. elegans.

The C. elegans lin-4 genomic clone pVT2DCla and the C. briggsae, C. remanei, and C. vulgaris lin-4 clones were sequenced. Among the four Caenorhabditis species, two main blocks of phylogenetically conserved DNA sequence were observed within the lin-4 rescuing (pVTSal) region, one from approximately base pair 85 to base pair 350 of pVTSal3, and another from about base pair 500 to base pair 600. The sequence conservation consists of stretches of complete identity, interspersed with short stretches of divergence, and insertions and deletions of 1 or more bp. Outside the sequences corresponding to the 693 bp pVTSal3 insert, the sequences of these four species are less well conserved. The fact that the lin-4 clones from four Caenorhabditis species function in C. elegans indicates that they encode similar functionally related gene products.

## lin-4 Is Unlikely to Encode a Protein

A probe from pVT2DCla was used to screen a cDNA library. The clones that were isolated and sequenced all contained DNA corresponding to genomic sequences that were almost entirely outside the 693 bp SalI (pVTSal) rescuing region. Comparison of these cDNA sequences with pVT2D sequences indicated that the corresponding mRNA is spliced from a primary transcript at conventional splice donor and acceptor sites within pVT2D that, for the most part, flank the pVTSal rescuing region. Therefore, it appears that the lin-4 gene lies within an intron of another gene. The normal function of the host gene is unknown but is apparently unrelated to lin-4 function; pVTSal fully rescues the lin-4(e972) mutant phenotype in spite of the fact that the e972 lesion deletes large regions of the host gene outside of pVTSal.

To determine whether the lin-4 rescuing region might encode a protein from a rare mRNA not represented in the cDNA library that we screened, we compared the potential protein coding sequences of the lin-4 rescuing region from the four species. These four lin-4 genes contain no conserved protein sequence that begins and ends with conventional start and stop codons or that can be predicted to be assembled using conventional C. elegans splice donor and acceptor sites. One relatively long predicted open reading frame of 143 amino acids in the region from base pair 1 to base pair 429 of the C. elegans sequence was tested by inserting 82 bp at an MluI site (base pair 90) and by inserting one base at a Tth111I site (base pair 259). Similarly, three mutations were introduced by oligonucleotide-mediated in vitro mutagenesis that each disrupt this and other putative open reading frames in the C. elegans clone: nonsense codons were created at base pairs 53 and 111, and a conserved ATG at base pair 546 was converted to ACG. All of these mutant constructs fully rescued lin-4(e972). These observations are inconsistent with a LIN-4 protein product.

## Two Small lin-4 Transcripts

The fact that lin-4 negatively regulates lin-14 activity in trans strongly implies a lin-4 gene product. Northern blot and RNase protection analysis using strand-specific probes that covered the 693 bp lin-4 rescuing sequence detected two small transcripts. Both transcripts mapped to the same region by Northern blots and RNase protection experiments and are transcribed in the same orientation. The larger transcript, lin-4L, appears to be 61 nt, and the smaller, lin-4S, is approximately 22 nt in length. lin-4L and lin-4S were present in total RNA isolated from mixed-stage populations of wild-type N2 and lin-4(e972) transgenic animals rescued by plasmid pVTSal6 but were not detected in RNA from lin-4 mutant animals. lin-4L is barely detectable on Northern blots and in RNase protection assays of RNA from mixed-stage N2 animals. lin-4L levels appear to be elevated somewhat, compared with those of the wild type, in RNA isolated from rescued animals. This may be due to overexpression of lin-4L from the rescuing arrays. In contrast with lin-4L, lin-4S appears to be very abundant and is easily detected in total RNA from both mixed-stage N2 and rescued lin-4(e972) strains.

Primer extension and S1 analysis of total RNA from mixed-stage N2, lin-4-rescued animals, or both was used to determine the 5' end of lin-4L. Primer extension experiments gave a single extended product of 49 nt, indicating that lin-4L transcription initiates at the T at position 513 of the C. elegans DNA sequence. The oligonucleotide primer used to map the 5' end of lin-4L should not have detected lin-4S transcripts, owing to the limited complementarity (6 bp) between the primer and lin-4S. S1 analysis confirmed the 5' end of lin-4L determined by the above primer extension experiment. Three S1 digestion products of 40, 41, and 42 nt were obtained. The largest product corresponded to the same 5' end as that identified by primer extension. The smaller bands presumably are due to breathing of the DNA:RNA hybrid during the S1 digestion.

The 3' end of lin-4L was also mapped by S1 analysis. A set of S1 digestion products ranging from 42 to 46 nt was obtained. The two most abundant species were 44 and 45 nt long; the 45 nt product corresponded to termination of the transcript at the C located at base pair 573 of pVTSal3. The multiple products obtained in this experiment may be in part due to probe heterogeneity caused by incomplete labeling of the four terminal bases of the probe or by breathing of the RNA:DNA hybrid during the S1 digestion, or both. It is also possible that there is natural variation in the 3' end of lin-4L.

lin-4S appears to have the same 5' end as lin-4L. RNase protection experiments using nested probes demonstrated that lin-4S spans a DdeI site that is located 5 nt downstream of the 5' end of lin-4L (at T 513). The length of the protected product corresponding to lin-4S is approximately 5 nt shorter in the case of the DdeI probe compared with the EcoRI probe, indicating that lin-4S starts at the same position as lin-4L.

The 3' end of lin-4S was mapped by S1 analysis. An oligonucleotide probe labeled at the two 3' terminal A residues that are complementary to the proposed 5' end of both lin-4 transcripts was hybridized to total N2 RNA and then digested with S1 nuclease at different temperatures. At 15°C, the S1 digestion produced protected products that ranged from 19-22 nt, while at 37°C, protected products were predominantly 17-21 nt long. These mapping data agree with the estimated size for lin-4S of 20 ± 2 nt from Northern blots and RNase protection experiments. This suggests that lin-4S is identical in sequence to the first 22 nt of lin-4L.

## lin-4 Mutations Affect lin-4L and lin-4S

As mentioned previously, neither lin-4 transcript was detectable in the single previously isolated lin-4 mutant, e972. This was not unexpected, since the e972 lesion is a deletion or rearrangement that removes at least 5 kb in the lin-4 region, including the entire lin-4S- and lin-4L-transcribed sequences. To test further the functional significance of the lin-4 transcribed sequences, we used a noncomplementation screen to isolate a novel lin-4 mutation and then identified the corresponding molecular lesion. Over 20,000 mutagenized chromosomes were screened, and a single novel lin-4 allele, ma161, was identified. DNA from ma161 animals was amplified by PCR and sequenced. The only sequence alteration in the 693 bp lin-4 region of ma161 DNA was a C to T transition at base pair 517. This point mutation would presumably alter nucleotide 5 in lin-4L and lin-4S.

## lin-4 Transcripts Are Complementary to the 3' UTR of lin-14 mRNA

The lin-4 transcribed sequence was combined in tandem to the sequence of the lin-14 3' UTR, and this sequence was searched for the formation of lin-4:lin-14 hybrid RNA structures. Two short blocks of lin-4 sequence were identified that are complementary to an element repeated seven times in the 3' UTR of lin-14. The first block of complementary sequence, 5'-GUUCCCUGAG-3', is (with the exception of the first G) at the very 5' end of both lin-4L and lin-4S. The second block of sequence, 5'-AAGUGUGAG-3', would lie internal to lin-4L and at the 3' end of lin-4S, with the 3' G perhaps missing from lin-4S.

# Discussion

## The lin-4 Locus

The C. elegans heterochronic gene lin-4 was identified by chromosomal walking from linked polymorphisms, characterization of the molecular lesion associated with a lin-4 allele, e972, and transformation rescue. lin-4(e972) is most likely a lin-4 null allele, because its lesion removes most of the sequences corresponding to the 693 bp clone that rescues lin-4 function. This observation, together with the fact that lin-14 null alleles are completely epistatic to lin-4(e972) suggests that the sole function of lin-4 is to downregulate lin-14.

The C. elegans lin-4 gene is located within the intron of a gene of unknown function. Although lin-4 is transcribed in the same orientation as that gene, it is unlikely that the expression or function of lin-4 depends on the host gene. This is because genomic clones that contain essentially only intron sequences of the host gene rescue lin-4(e972) extrachromosomally. These rescued animals appear fully wild type, despite the fact that e972 deletes a substantial portion of the host gene in addition to the lin-4 rescuing region, indicating that the activity of the host gene is probably not required for lin-4 function or for other aspects of normal development. Although our data indicate that the 693 bp SalI rescuing fragment contains the entire lin-4 locus, all our rescue experiments were performed using high copy extrachromosomal arrays. Since we have not tested the 693 bp SalI clones in single copy, we cannot rule out the possibility that some additional sequences may be required for full lin-4 activity. Generally, rescue of lin-4 retarded defects by high-copy plasmid arrays was complete, and we did not consistently observe additional developmental defects that might be associated with overexpression of lin-4 from the arrays.

## lin-4 Is Unlikely to Encode a Protein

Two lines of evidence strongly suggest that none of the lin-4 genomic sequence encodes protein. First, strategically located frameshift and nonsense mutations, as well as an ATG to ACG mutation, were introduced into several putative open reading frames of the C. elegans genomic clone without affecting rescuing activity. Second, comparison of the C. elegans, C. briggsae, C. remanei, and C. vulgaris lin-4 genomic sequences (which are functionally interchangeable in C. elegans) revealed a high level of nucleic acid sequence conservation but no conserved open reading frames. Regions of conserved sequence do not show a degeneracy at the third base positions of putative codons that would be expected for protein coding sequences, and they contain deletions or insertions that would cause frameshifts. There are no splice donor or acceptor sites that would compensate for these frameshifts. Thus, if a conserved protein product were encoded by the lin-4 locus, its synthesis would need to be directed by unorthodox translation start and stop signals. The 693 bp C. elegans fragment rescues in either orientation, arguing against the generation of a lin-4 protein from the rescuing fragment using translational signals from the vector.

## lin-4 Encodes Small RNAs

Northern blots and RNase protection experiments with lin-4 genomic probes detected the lin-4S and lin-4L small RNAs in total RNA of wild-type and rescued lin-4(e972) animals. Several observations argue that either lin-4L RNA or lin-4S RNA or both are the functional lin-4 gene products. First, the ma161 mutation, which results in loss of lin-4 function, affects a conserved C of the lin-4L and lin-4S transcripts. Second, the DNA sequence encoding lin-4L and lin-4S is virtually identical in four nematode species. Finally, the sequence complementarity between the lin-4 transcripts and the lin-14 mRNA suggests a direct base-pairing interaction between lin-4 and lin-14 RNAs and lends credence to the idea that lin-4S, lin-4L, or both may be the active lin-4 gene product. Regions of very high sequence conservation were identified outside the lin-4L- and lin-4S-transcribed regions of the lin-4-rescuing clones. One of these is located between approximately 140 and 420 bp upstream of the transcribed sequences. This region is essential for lin-4 function, but its orientation is not critical, because when it is inverted with respect to the transcribed region, partial rescuing activity is observed. These upstream conserved regions could contain regulatory sequences or encode additional small RNAs of an abundance too low to be detected in our experiments. No other lin-4 products besides lin-4L and lin-4S were consistently detected in our experiments.

lin-4L and lin-4S may be transcribed from the same promoter, given that their 5' ends appear to be identical. lin-4S could be generated by a posttranscriptional processing of lin-4L, or lin-4L may be produced by read-through of a lin-4S termination site. It is possible that either lin-4L or lin-4S is a nonfunctional byproduct of the biogenesis of the other, or that both are derived by the processing of a longer precursor transcript. lin-4L and lin-4S seem to be synthesized in approximately normal levels in a strain lacking the lin-14 3' UTR, suggesting that the generation of the two products likely occurs independently of an interaction with the lin-14 mRNA. The fact that the lengths determined for lin-4S and lin-4L by RNase protection and S1 mapping agree with the lengths estimated by Northern blot analysis indicates that the RNAs are not heavily modified posttranscriptionally (for example by significant splicing, polyadenylation, or covalent linkage to protein). However, these experiments would not necessarily detect slight modification or processing of the RNAs, such as modified nucleotides or cap structures. Further experiments are required to develop a complete description of lin-4 RNA biogenesis and structure.

## Antisense Complementarity to the lin-14 3' UTR

Sequence comparison of the lin-4 transcripts with the 3' UTR of lin-14 revealed that a sequence element repeated seven times in the lin-14 3' UTR is complementary to the lin-4 transcripts. The significance of this complementarity to lin-4 function is supported by phylogenetic and genetic observations. First, the seven repeated elements are conserved between the C. elegans and C. briggsae lin-14 sequences, consistent with a conserved lin-4:lin-14 RNA base pairing and the observed conservation of lin-4 function between these species. Second, the lin-4(ma161) loss-of-function mutation is located within a block of lin-14-complementary sequences, and so could affect lin-4 activity by altering or destabilizing a lin-4:lin-14 RNA hybrid. Third, the seven lin-4-complementary elements occur in the lin-14 region deleted by lin-14(gf) alleles. These observations strongly support the hypothesis that lin-4 downregulates LIN-14 protein levels through a direct RNA-RNA interaction with the lin-14 3' UTR.

Although the longest stretch of contiguous sequence complementarity between lin-4 and lin-14 is 10 nt, there is precedence for specific RNA-RNA interactions by such short regions of complementarity. For example, interactions among spliceosomal RNAs and between spliceosomal RNAs and the pre-mRNAs involve similarly short duplexes. Since both lin-4S and lin-4L span the ma161 lesion, and both include sequences complementary to the 3' UTR of lin-14, either could in principle interact with lin-14 RNA. Although our 5' and 3' end-mapping experiments indicate that lin-4S might not contain all the lin-14-complementary sequences, the ambiguity in these data leaves open the possibility that lin-4S contains the entire lin-14-complementary sequence. Since lin-4S is significantly more abundant than lin-4L, it seems likely that lin-4S plays the major role in base pairing with lin-14 RNA, especially if the interaction is stoichiometric. Furthermore, the predicted secondary structure of lin-4L would sequester within a stem most of the bases that are complementary to lin-14, perhaps rendering lin-4L inactive for base-pairing with lin-14 mRNA. We cannot evaluate how the secondary structure of lin-4S might affect its function, since the precise 5' and 3' ends of lin-4S are uncertain, and this variability would significantly alter any proposed secondary structure.

A definitive proof of the proposed antisense pairing between lin-4 and lin-14 RNAs will require the construction of compensatory base-pairing mutations in lin-14 and lin-4. Furthermore, determination of whether the interaction involves a stable complex or a transient (perhaps catalytic) interaction will require careful measurement of lin-4 and lin-14 RNA levels and direct tests for a complex in vivo.

## Temporal Regulation of lin-14 by lin-4

If lin-4 RNA inhibits lin-14 translation by an antisense interaction with the lin-14 3' UTR, then the temporal decrease of LIN-14 protein during C. elegans development is probably generated by a stage-specific increase in lin-4 gene expression. According to this view, lin-4 is inactive during late embryogenesis and the early part of the L1, permitting synthesis of a high level of LIN-14 protein, which programs the execution of L1 fates. Later in the L1 stage, lin-4 gene expression is activated, and the lin-4L transcripts, lin-4S transcripts, or both bind to the complementary sequence elements in the 3' UTR of lin-14 mRNA. This RNA-RNA interaction results, through some unknown mechanism, in a decrease in LIN-14 protein between the L1 and L2 stages. The resulting reduced level of LIN-14 protein specifies the expression of L2-specific fates in the L2, and L3-specific fates in the L3. To downregulate lin-14 globally, lin-4 would have to be activated stage-specifically in at least those cells that express lin-14. A developmental activation of lin-4 might involve transcriptional induction or posttranscriptional modification of lin-4 RNA, or both. Little is known about what developmental signal(s) activate lin-4 gene expression, but it is likely that lin-4 is not activated until after a food signal initiates postembryonic development, since LIN-14 protein does not decrease until after feeding. lin-4 may be required only in the L1 to modify lin-14 mRNA into an untranslatable state, or also during later stages to inhibit LIN-14 protein synthesis continuously. Features of this model need to be tested by examining in detail the temporal profile of lin-4 transcript levels and by artificially manipulating the level of active lin-4 RNA during development.

## Antisense Regulation via 3' UTRs

There are a number of known examples of natural antisense regulatory mechanisms that affect the stability or translatability of target RNAs. lin-4 RNA probably does not control the stability of lin-14 mRNA because the steady state levels of lin-14 mRNA remain relatively constant during development and are not appreciably altered in a lin-4 mutant background. lin-4 could inhibit LIN-14 protein synthesis indirectly, for example by modifying lin-14 mRNA, or by localizing it to a subcellular compartment (such as the nucleus) where it is inaccessible to the ribosomes. Alternatively, lin-4 RNA may bind to lin-14 mRNA in the cytoplasm and inhibit its translation by interacting directly with components of the translational machinery. Distinguishing among these broad classes of models will require determination of the subcellular location of lin-4 and lin-14 RNAs.

Previously known natural antisense mechanisms that affect translation involve interaction of an antisense RNA with the 5' UTR of the mRNA and appear to affect ribosome binding. By contrast, if lin-4 does directly inhibit translation, then the proposed interaction between lin-4 RNA and the 3' end of lin-14 might represent a novel kind of antisense translational control mechanism. Structural features of the lin-4-lin-14 complex might interfere with a critical interaction between the 3' and 5' ends of the lin-14 mRNA. A regulation of poly(A) length might be involved or an interaction with translation factors, such as poly(A) binding protein, that act via the 3' end. lin-4 RNA may act in conjunction with proteins, but to date there is no genetic evidence for genes other than lin-4 that regulate lin-14 via its 3' UTR. It is noteworthy that lin-4 RNA sequences that are not complementary to lin-14, and hence are looped out of the predicted lin-4:lin-14 hybrid, are completely conserved. This loop may bind cellular proteins involved in the control of lin-14 mRNA. Proteins that interact with lin-4 RNA might also have functions essential for cell viability, and so it may not be surprising that the genes encoding them have apparently not been previously identified by a visible heterochronic phenotype.

The involvement of 3' UTR sequences in mRNA localization, stability, or translation and the developmental roles of posttranscriptional regulatory mechanisms mediated by 3' UTR sequences are becoming increasingly clear. For example, the mRNAs of mouse protamines, Drosophila bicoid, hunchback, and nanos, and nematode fem-3 and tra-2 contain developmentally significant posttranscriptional regulatory sequences in their 3' UTRs. As yet, no antisense regulatory RNAs have been shown to be involved in the above cases, but the possibility has not been ruled out for any of them. Thus, lin-14 may not be the only developmental gene that is posttranscriptionally regulated via its 3' end by a small antisense RNA. Because the regulatory affect of a small antisense RNA such as lin-4 is directed toward the translation of a specific antisense partner mRNA, translational control of gene expression by small antisense RNAs may be a particularly effective strategy for providing a developmental switch of very high specificity.

## Small Regulatory RNAs

lin-4 may represent a class of developmental regulatory genes that encode small antisense RNA products, but such genes might be difficult to identify by standard genetic approaches. If lin-4 is active in lin-14 shut-off, it may be among the smallest functional RNAs so far identified. The mouse and human Xist genes are believed to encode active RNAs important in the control of X chromosome inactivation, and the mouse H19 gene also appears to encode an untranslated RNA. However, the products of both these genes are much larger than lin-4 RNA; the Xist RNAs are 15-17 kb and the H19 RNAs are 2.6 kb. Small RNA molecules play a critical role in essential cellular processes such as RNA processing or editing. However, even compared with this group, the lin-4 RNAs are unusually small. At 61 and 22 bases, respectively, lin-4L and lin-4S are shorter than the 80 base guide RNA molecules from Leishmania. Given its small size, lin-4S may interact directly with relatively few cellular proteins.

The scarcity of lin-4 alleles is consistent with the relatively small size of the lin-4 locus. We identified a single allele, ma161, after screening a relatively large number (>20,000) of mutagenized genome equivalents. Other small RNA genes within introns have been identified in C. elegans as part of a genomic sequencing project and in mouse and human. The small target size for mutations that affect such genes without altering the host gene and the lack, in many cases, of distinguishing features in their genomic sequence might contribute to the difficulty of identifying other small RNA genes like lin-4.

# Methods

## Nematode Strains

C. elegans strains used in this work were the following: wild-type C. elegans var Bristol (strain N2); C. elegans var Bergerac; lin-4(e972); lin-4(e972)/vab-9(e1744)/mnC1; bli-3(e768)lin-4(e972)dpy-10(e128); lin-14(n179ts); lin-4(e972)/mnC1; lin-4(e972)dpy-10(e128)/mnC1; lin-14(n179ts); lin-4(e972); maEx114(pVTSal3,pRF4); and lin-4(e972); maEx115(pVTSal6,pRF4). Other Caenorhabditis species used in this work are the following: C. briggsae, obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center, C. vulgaris, and C. remanei, obtained from Scott Baird.

## Mutagenesis

Noncomplementation screens were performed by treating N2 males with ethylmethane sulfonate, mating them with hermaphrodites of the strain lin-4(e972)dpy-10(e128)/mnC1: lin-14(n179ts), and screening the non-Dpy F1 for hermaphrodites that displayed a Lin phenotype.

## RFLP Mapping

Physical genetic mapping of Bristol/Bergerac RFLPs in the lin-4 region was performed. A strain congenic to Bristol for all chromosomes except the lin-4 region of LGII was obtained by performing nine successive backcrosses of lin-4(e972) to Bergerac lin-4(+), isolating the lin-4(+) allele at each backcross. This strain and Bergerac were crossed with bli-3(e768)lin-4(e972)dpy-10(e128)/+++ males to obtain bergerac lin-4(+)/bristol bli-3(e768)lin-4(e972)dpy-10(e128) animals. Progeny from these hermaphrodites were screened for Lin-non-Dpy, Dpy-non-Lin, and Bli-non-Lin recombinants. DNA from these recombinants was analyzed by southern blotting using as probes clones situated to the left of dpy-10 on the C. elegans physical map.

## Southern Blots

Preparation of genomic DNA, agarose gel electrophoresis, and Southern blotting were performed using standard techniques. Probes were prepared from cosmid or YAC DNAs by random primed synthesis. YAC DNA was fractionated by field inversion gel electrophoresis after spheroplast lysis in the gel. YAC DNA was recovered from gel slices by electroelution, followed by phenol extraction and ethanol precipitation.

## Isolation of Genomic Clones

C. elegans genomic DNA was cut with EcoRI, ligated into λZAP vector (Stratagene), and plated on CES200. Replicas of the library were probed, in the presence of total yeast carrier DNA, with YAC DNA labeled by random primed synthesis. Plaques that hybridized to Y18C1 probe but not to Y42A4 probe were identified, the inserts were excised in vivo as Bluescript plasmid clones, and the plasmids were reanalyzed by restriction enzyme digestion and Southern hybridization with the above YAC probes. Plasmids that retained their differential hybridization pattern were pVT2D, pVT1C, and pVT6G. A probe from pVT2D was used to identify clones containing lin-4 sequences in λZAP libraries of genomic DNA from C. briggsae and C. remanei. The C. briggsae lin-4 sequence was determined for a 1.4 kb EcoRV clone pVTbr12, and the C. remanei lin-4 sequence was determined for a 2.0 kb EcoRI clone pVTreA1. Short stretches of conserved sequence outside the rescuing region were used as a guide to design primers to amplify lin-4 sequences from C. vulgaris worms. The 0.9 kb PCR product from C. vulgaris was inserted into Bluescript vector, creating clone pVTvul4c.

## DNA Sequencing

Sequencing was performed by the method of Sanger using the Sequenase 2.0 kit. Sequence was analyzed with a Macintosh, using DNA Strider 1.2 or MULFOLD software, and with a VAX, using the GCG Sequence Analysis Software Package (version 7.1) by Genetics Computer Group, Incorporated. Sequence alignment was generated by the GCG program LINEUP and optimized manually.

Single-stranded lin-4 sequences (one strand only) were amplified from ma161 genomic DNA using PCR and a 500-fold excess of primer rf2 to rcl2. The region amplified using these primers included all of the 693 bp SalI fragment and about 100 bp 5' of this region. Two separate PCR amplifications were performed, and the single-stranded pools were sequenced in parallel to avoid potential sequence alterations introduced by Taq polymerase.

## C. elegans Transformation

Plasmids for injection were prepared by standard alkaline lysis miniprep procedure, followed by polyethylene glycol precipitation. Plasmids were injected at concentrations ranging from 10-30 μg/ml, together with pRF4 (which confers a dominant Rolling phenotype) at 100-150 μg/ml in TE (10 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 1 mM EDTA). The cosmid C02B6 was injected at 15 μg/ml with pRF4 at 150 μg/ml. Clones were injected into either VT499 or VT460. For VT499, rescue of the lin-4 defects was scored by examining F1 Vab Rollers and determining whether they were Non-Lin. For VT460, rescue was signified by F1 Rolling animals that produced progeny among which none of the Lin animals were Rolling, and all of the non-Lin animals were Rolling. From such rescued F1 animals, transformed lines were established that continued to exhibit rescue. Lines were also established for clones that failed to rescue, and these were analyzed by PCR to establish that they contained the injected DNA. Phenotypes (egg laying, body length, adult alae) were assayed using the dissecting microscope.

## Exonuclease III Deletions and In Vitro Mutagenesis

pVT2DCla was double-digested with ApaI-ClaI or PstI-EcoRV and treated with Exonuclease III as described. Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis of pVT2DCla or pVTSal3 was performed as described, except that single-stranded template DNA was prepared by superinfection of cells containing the Bluescript plasmid (Stratagene) with M13 K07 helper phage.

## Preparation of Nematode RNA

Animals were harvested from nematode growth medium agarose plates, washed several times in M9 buffer, collected by centrifugation, and frozen at -70°C. An equal volume of 2x LETS (200 mM LiCl, 20 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris [pH 7.8], 2% SDS) and 2 vol of phenol, CHCl3, isoamyl alcohol (IAA) were added to the frozen worm pellet, which was then quickly thawed. Animals were lysed by vortexing with glass beads for several minutes. The aqueous phase was separated by centrifugation and reextracted three times with phenol, CHCl3, IAA. RNA was precipitated from this aqueous mixture by adding LiCl (final concentration 0.2 M) and 3 vol of ethanol and incubating at -20°C overnight. RNA was collected by centrifugation, and contaminating DNA was digested with RQ1 DNase (Promega, 5-10 U/mg of RNA) for 30 min in 40 mM Tris (pH 7.9), 10 mM NaCl, 6 mM MgCl2, and 0.1 mM CaCl2 at 37°C. RQ1 DNase was removed by extraction with phenol, CHCl3, IAA, and RNA was reprecipitated by the addition of NaOAc (final concentration, 0.3 M) and 3 vol of ethanol at -20°C.

## Northern Blots

Total RNA, 30 μg per lane, was separated by electrophoresis in TBE (89 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 89 mM sodium borate, and 2 mM EDTA) through an 11% urea-acrylamide gel (0.75 mm x 16 cm x 16 cm). RNA was electrophoretically transferred to Zeta-Probe membrane (Bio-Rad) in 0.5 x TBE at 250 mA overnight at 4°C. RNA was crosslinked to the membrane by UV irradiation (1200 μJ, Stratagene UV Stratalinker), and then the membrane was baked at 80°C for 30 min. Antisense lin-4 probe was synthesized by runoff transcription from the plasmid pMspl digested with EcoRI using T7 RNA polymerase and standard transcription conditions. pMspl was constructed by insertion of an MspI fragment from bp 506 to bp 568 of lin-4 into the ClaI site of pBluescript SK(-). Hybridization and washing conditions with pMspl antisense probe were according to the manufacturer's specifications, except that the hybridization temperature was 42°C and the most stringent wash was 0.2x SSC, 0.1% SDS at room temperature.

Northern blots were stripped by washing at 90°C in 0.1 x SSC, 0.5% SDS and then were reprobed with an anti-U6 oligonucleotide probe, rfMGH12. rfMGH12 was 5' end-labeled using [γ-32P]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase according to standard procedures. Hybridization and wash conditions were as designated for oligonucleotide probes. In some cases, DNA oligonucleotides were run as size markers on the gel. This marker lane was cut from the gel prior to blotting and stained in 10 μg/ml ethidium bromide for several hours and visualized by UV illumination.

## S1 Nuclease Protection

S1 analysis using oligonucleotide probes was as described. Total RNA (30 μg) was analyzed in each sample. The initial hybridization of probes (10^5 cpm/sample) to RNA was under standard conditions except for the rfMGH8 probe, in which case hybridization was in an aqueous solution (final concentration, 1 M NaCl, 0.17 M HEPES [pH 7.5], and 0.3 mM EDTA [pH 8]) at 50°C overnight. S1 digestion reactions contained 300 units of S1 nuclease and were at 37°C unless otherwise noted. S1 digestion products were analyzed on 10-12% urea-acrylamide gel, and the gels were exposed wet to XAR-5 film. rfMGH1 was 5' end-labeled using [γ-32P]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase under standard reaction conditions. rfMGH5 was labeled at its 3' end. The reaction was stopped by heating to 75°C for 10 minutes, and the oligonucleotides were ethanol precipitated in the presence of 10 μg of carrier tRNA, resuspended in 1X TBE plus 80% formamide, heated to 90°C, and separated by electrophoresis through a 10% urea-acrylamide gel. The band corresponding to 3' end-labeled rfMGH5 was cut from the gel, and the oligonucleotide was eluted by soaking the gel slice in 0.3 M NaOAc overnight at room temperature. The solution was extracted with phenol, CHCl3, IAA, and 3' end-labeled rfMGH5 was precipitated by addition of ethanol.

## RNase Protection

RNase protection experiments were according to standard procedures with the following modifications: 15 μg of total RNA and 5 x 10^5 cpm of probe were used in each reaction. To reduce contaminating salts in the samples prior to loading the gel, several additional ethanol precipitations, at room temperature and with no added salt, were performed. Gels were exposed wet to XAR-5 film. Probes were generated by runoff transcription of 0.5 μg of pMspl (predigested with either EcoRI or DdeI) using T7 RNA polymerase and 60 μCi of [32P]UTP (800 Ci/mmol). RNA markers were generated by runoff transcription of pBS (cut with AccI, SmaI or EcoRI) with T3 RNA polymerase in the presence of [32P]UTP under standard reaction conditions.

## Primer Extension

Primer extension analysis was as described, with the following modifications: 30 μg of total RNA and 200 units of MMLV reverse transcriptase were used in each reaction. rfMGH3 was 5' end-labeled using [γ-32P]ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase. Reverse transcription was at 42°C. The extended products were separated on a 10% polyacrylamide gel that was exposed wet to XAR-5 film. Size markers were generated by 5' end-labeling oligonucleotides of specific lengths with T4 polynucleotide kinase and [γ-32P]ATP or by sequencing mp18 using Sequenase, -40 reverse primer, and [32P]dATP according to standard protocols.

## Oligonucleotides

- rf2 (amplification of ma161), 5'-TAGTGGAACTCTATTGT-3'.
- rf3 (sequencing ma161), 5'-CTAGACAATTTCTAGAG-3'.
- rfa (sequencing), 5'-GACGCGTCGCCAAGCGGTGGTG-3'.
- rfb (sequencing), 5'-AGTGAAGAGACTGGGTCAT-3'.
- rfc (sequencing), 5'-CCTGTTCCCTGAGACCTCAA-3'.
- rfd (sequencing), 5'-ACCGTCCTGGTACCCGGAGA-3'.
- rcl2 (amplification and sequencing ma161), 5'-ACCGCTTCTTCTCCCTA-3'.
- rcl3 (sequencing), 5'-GGTAAGTGTGATGAGTC-3'.
- rcl4 (amplification of C. vulgaris and sequencing), 5'-CAACAGCTCCATCACTC-3'.
- rcl7 (sequencing ma161), 5'-GACGAAGCGACCGAATG-3'.
- rcl8 (mutagenesis), 5'-GCTGGCACTACCACC-3'.
- rcl9 (mutagenesis), 5'-CGTAGACTACCTCGC-3'.
- rcl117 (amplification of C. vulgaris and sequencing), 5'-GGCACAGGGGACAATCA-3'.
- rcl118 (amplification), 5'-GGAATTC(GT)(AG)TT(GA)TA(GA)TC(AG)AC(TC)TCTG-3'.
- rcl21 (sequencing), 5'-AAAACAGCCGCCTT-3'.
- rfMGH1 (5' end S1 mapping of lin-4L), 5'-GTGAAGCATCAATAGTACACTCACACTTGAGGTCTCAGGGAACAGGCCGGAAGGCCGGAAGCATAAACTC-3'.
- rfMGH3 (primer extension analysis), 5'-CCCAGGTGTGAAGCATCAATAGTACACTCACAC-3'.
- rfMGH5 (3' end mapping lin-4L), 5'-CTCACGAATTCGACTACCGTCCTGGTACCCGGAGAGCCCAGGTGTGAAGCATCAATAGTACACTC-3'.
- rfMGH6 (3' end labeling of rfmgh5), 5'-GTGTGAGTGTACTATTGATGCTTCACACCT-3'.
- rfMGH7 (3' end labeling of rfmgh8), 5'-TTCCCTGAGACCTCAAG-3'.
- rfMGH8 (3' end mapping lin-4S), 5'-GACTGCTAAGATAGTACACTCACACTTGAGGTCTCAGGG-3'.
- rfMGH12 (anti-U6), 5'-GCAGGGGCCATGCTAATCTTCTCTCTGTATTGTTCCAATTTTAGTATATGTTCTCCCTATAGTGAGTCGTATTA-3'.
- va22 (mutagenesis), 5'-GTCCTGGTACCCGGAGAGCCCAGGTGTGAAGCGTCAATAG-3'.
